Psychiatry
Interpersonal and Biological Processes

ISSN: 0033-2747 (Print) 1943-281X (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/upsy20

The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies.
James C. West PhD
To cite this article: James C. West PhD (2015) The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress,
and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies., Psychiatry, 78:4, 380-383, DOI:
10.1080/00332747.2015.1105632
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00332747.2015.1105632

Published online: 08 Jan 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 26

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=upsy20
Download by: [Deakin University Library]

Date: 16 March 2016, At: 09:23

Psychiatry, 78:380383, 2015
ISSN: 0033-2747 print / 1943-281X online
DOI: 10.1080/00332747.2015.1105632

380

Book Review

Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 09:23 16 March 2016

ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON and ANDREW
McAFEE. The Second Machine Age: Work,
Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of
Brilliant Technologies. New York, NY: W.
W. Norton, 2014. 320 pages. ISBN-13:
978-0-393-23935-5. $26.95 hardcover.
Reviewed by JAMES C. WEST
In 1965, engineer Gordon Moore
famously predicted that the number of
components per integrated circuit would
doubleannually, allowing 65,000 components
to t into a single integrated circuit by 1975.
Advancement of digital technology and its
rapid assimilation makes it difcult to imagine
our world without it. Advances in the past
decade have moved us from cell phones to
smartphones, from video cassette recorders to
digital video recorders, and from paper charts
to electronic medical records. Video game
consoles in 2006 offered as much computing
power as supercomputers used in nuclear weapons simulations nine years earlier. Even more
amazing, that same console accomplished in
one square foot and 200 watts the same amount
of computing that required 1,600 square feet
and 800 kilowatts (Brynjolfsson & McAfee,
2014, p. 49). Alongside the convenience of
maps at our ngertips digital technology is
also changing society, economics, and even
basic human interaction. When new technology
emerges and advances so rapidly, there is inevitable lag in societys adaptation to it. In their
book The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant

Technologies Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew
McAfee offer examples of the tremendous capabilities emerging through digital technology
and discuss the economic benets and challenges resulting from such rapid change. When
one considers these changes as a psychiatrist,
even more intriguing questions emerge about
the human capacity to adapt.
Brynjolfsson and McAfee offer three
core observations. First, humanity is in the
middle of a period of astonishing evolution
of digital technologies. In line with Moores
law, the capability of digital technology continues to double roughly every one to two
years. Transformations that occur as a result
of the explosion of digital technologies will
be profoundly benecial. The average person
today can access a greater variety of goods
and services, produced and distributed more
efciently, and typically of better quality.
The transition to digital technology is not
without signicant challenges, and progress
will leave some in society behind. The
changes wrought by digital technology on
economics so far have not been entirely
benecial. The Second Machine Age offers
an entertaining, enlightening, and thoughtprovoking treatment of these topics.
Not since the introduction of the steam
engine in the 18th century has society confronted such a transforming advance as
digital technology. Starting in the late 18th
century, combustion, electrication, and
mechanization shifted massive segments of
the world economy from small, local, and
primarily agrarian production into large,

This article not subject to U.S. copyright law.
James C. West, MD, is afliated with the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda,
Maryland.
Address correspondence to James C. West, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge
Road, Bethesda, MD 20814. E-mail: James.west@usuhs.edu

Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 09:23 16 March 2016

Book Reviews

multinational, and industrial production.
Industrialization took place over 200 years
and multiple generations. In contrast, digital
technology rst appeared in the middle of the
20th century and has advanced orders of
magnitude faster than the mechanical technology of the Industrial Revolution. Tasks
once deemed impossible are now routinely
accomplished through digital technology.
Many readers are accessing this article in an
electronic format that did not exist 20 years
ago. How different that pace of advancement
is compared to an early-20th-century farmer
admiring his sons mechanical tractor, the
rst in the county.
Advancement of technology in the digital age is exponential, digital, and recombinant,
according to Brynjolfsson and McAfee. Exponential progress follows Moores law: capacity
and capability double approximately every 12
to 18 months. To put this in perspective, at the
end of a 75-year human life span computing
power will be 1015 times what it was at birth.
To describe progress as digital emphasizes that
advances occur via an unending stream of ones
and zerosbits of information. Not only are
these bits inexpensive to reproduce, they can be
accessed almost innitely and never used up. As
a result, information can be reproduced and
disseminated widely at a minimal cost. Digital
progress further exploits this digitization of
information through increased ability to network information, thereby increasing its
value. Brynjolfsson and McAfee present the
real-time trafc application Waze as powerful
example (pp. 5860). Waze gathers speed and
location data from many users. The application
combines all these small pieces of information
from subscribers and returns to them recombined and more valuable information on trafc
conditions and recommendations for alternate
routes. The value of each users information
increases as the total number of users
increasesa network effect. Google recognized
the value of this networked information, purchasing Waze for $1 billion (Vindu, 2013).
Waze also demonstrates the recombinant

381

nature of digital progress. To describe progress
as recombinant means that innovation is not
the result of a few brilliant entirely new ideas
but rather the result of more efcient powerful
combinations of existing ideas. Combining
crowdsourced information with mapping technology to provide real-time trafc information
did not require inventing a completely new
technology but rather took advantage of a
powerful new combination.
What then is the impact of this explosion
in digital technology on society and the economy? According to Brynjolfsson and McAfee
(2014), understanding the impact of digital
technology requires understanding the concepts
of bounty and spread. Thanks to digital technology, the average worker produces in
11 hours what it took 40 hours to produce in
1950 (p. 99). Digital technology not only
improves process efciency and labor productivity, it makes greater variety of higher quality
goods available to a broader consumer market.
Digital technology adds potential value streams
in the form of intellectual property, process
optimization, user-generated content, and
human capital. While this would all seem
positive, the increased bounty of digital technology has also increased the spread of assets. The
rising tide of digital technology has not only
failed to lift all boats; it may actually
submerge a few. Median income in the United
States actually declined 10%, going from a high
of $54,900 in 1999 to $50,000 in 2011 (p.
129). In that time the top 10% of earners
increased their share of national income to
over 50%, with the top 0.01% of earners taking in more than 5% of national income. Digital
technology amplies this concentration of
wealth through two forces. Individuals with
skills enabling them to take advantage of digital
technology command a higher wage in the
current market compared to unskilled workers.
Skill-biased change led to high school dropouts
earning less in 2012 compared to 1963, while
college graduates earn four times more (p. 135).
At the same time, those individuals who control
digital technology or intellectual property

Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 09:23 16 March 2016

382

derived from it earn even more as digital capital
can be reproduced at little or no cost. Although
prosperity increases overall, it does so with an
increasing share of the prot going to those
controlling digital capital and a decreasing
share going to those who labor. Wage share of
gross domestic product decreased from a historical average of 64% to 58%, while prot share
increased from 20% to 26% in just three years
(pp. 144145). Big winners become bigger winners, and those previously just getting by nd
themselves increasingly disadvantaged.
Rapid changes brought by digital technology and the increased spread of wealth
should generate interest among psychiatrists,
psychologists, and mental health providers as
much as economists. As digital technologies
displace entire occupations, workers face the
challenge of sustaining themselves and their
families. The primary stress of loss of income
is compounded by the stress of nding a new
role in an economy that may or may not
value a particular workers skills. Digital
technology enhances the search for employment with a greater range of opportunities
available, rapid and convenient access to that
information, and ability of the individual job
seeker to rapidly and inexpensively reproduce and transmit his or her personal information to a large number or potential
employers. Unfortunately, that same job
seeker can have rapid access to an endless
stream of media stories about tremendous
successes of the few lucky individuals with
the skills and capital able to take advantage
of the new marketplace. Where will the balance fall of benet versus impairment from
digital technology for each displaced
worker? The concentration of wealth and
assets by those holding digital and intellectual capital will generate signicant discontent among those parts of society that
recognize their disadvantage. An effective
therapist will understand not only the role
digital technology plays in creating and
perpetuating an individuals distress but
also the potential solutions offered.

Book Reviews

Exponential expansion of digital technology presents further challenges to consider.
At what point does the rate of environmental
change exceed the capacity of humans to
adapt? Will we face a surge in depression and
anxiety complaints in the face of individuals
inability to change their thoughts and behaviors to accommodate smartphones and
interconnected devices? Are there ways in
which the human mind is adapting to this
explosion of digital technology that may not
be in our best interest in the long run? The
movie Wall-E presents us with a future in
which humans have become so sedentary that
they turn into obese blobs endlessly consuming
digital entertainment while an array of
technology tends to all of their physiologic
needs. DSM-5 proposes Internet gaming disorder as an indicator of the power of digital
technology to hijack our brain reward systems
as powerfully as alcohol or any other substance. Cyberbullying extends the reach of
those wishing to harm even into the safety of
ones home. Less threatening, but equally
concerning, children increasingly communicate digitally to the exclusion of face-to-face
interaction. The same trend appears to be
increasing among adults as well. What will
be the nature of our interpersonal communication 10 years from now, and are we ready
for it? Smartphone applications offer cognitive-behavioral therapywithout the physical
presence of a therapist. Psychiatry must adapt
to these challenges as much as the mail sorter
displaced by a digital scanner.
To be certain, the expansion of digital
technology has brought tremendous benet to
society. Brynjolfsson and McAfee challenge us
to consider unanticipated consequences of this
growth, particularly the spread of wealth.
Their book offers public policy suggestions
aimed at addressing the economic changes
brought about by digital technology. Psychiatry and mental and behavioral health should
take this discussion into our own realm and
consider the implications of digital technology
on human capacity to adapt and the

Book Reviews

383

consequences of failure to do so. Further, we
need to consider our future responses as our
patients increasingly struggle with understanding their place in an increasingly digital world.

ORCID

James C. West
0000-0003-0123-4370

http://orcid.org/

REFERENCES

Downloaded by [Deakin University Library] at 09:23 16 March 2016

Moore, G. (1965). Cramming more components
onto integrated circuits. Electronics, 35(8), 114ff.

Vindu, G. (2013, June 11). Google expands its
boundaries, buying Waze for $1 billion. New
York Times.

