Using narratives and storytelling to communicate
science with nonexpert audiences
Michael F. Dahlstrom1
Greenlee School of Journalism and Communication, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50010
Edited by Dietram A. Scheufele, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, and accepted by the Editorial Board April 7, 2014 (received for review
November 1, 2013)

Although storytelling often has negative connotations within
science, narrative formats of communication should not be
disregarded when communicating science to nonexpert audiences. Narratives offer increased comprehension, interest, and
engagement. Nonexperts get most of their science information
from mass media content, which is itself already biased toward
narrative formats. Narratives are also intrinsically persuasive,
which offers science communicators tactics for persuading otherwise
resistant audiences, although such use also raises ethical considerations. Future intersections of narrative research with ongoing
discussions in science communication are introduced.
persuasion

| ethics

S

torytelling often has a bad reputation within science (1).
Viewed as baseless or even manipulative, stories are often
denigrated with statements such as, the plural of anecdote is not
data. Such a perspective is valuable within the context of scientific data collection to underscore the important difference
between making informed generalizations from systematically
sampled populations versus overgeneralizations from small and
often biased samples.
However, when the context moves from data collection to the
communication of science to nonexpert audiences, stories,
anecdotes, and narratives become not only more appropriate but
potentially more important. Research suggests that narratives
are easier to comprehend and audiences find them more engaging than traditional logical-scientific communication (3, 4).
More pragmatically, the sources from which nonexperts receive
most of their science information are already biased toward narrative formats of communication. Once out of formal schooling,
nonexpert audiences get the majority of their scientific information
from mass media content (5). Because media practitioners have to
compete for the attention of their audiences, they routinely rely on
stories, anecdotes, and other narrative formats to cut although the
information clutter and resonate with their audiences. Although
the plural of anecdote may not be data, the anecdote has a greater
chance of reaching and engaging with a nonexpert audience. The
challenge for science communicators, then, is to decide when and
how narratives can effectively and appropriately help them communicate to nonexperts about science.
The purpose of this article is to synthesize literature on
narrative communication and place it within a science communication context. The article begins with a review of narrative literature, as well as the mass media context through
which most nonexpert audiences get their information about
science. The article then reviews the potential persuasive
impacts of narrative communication and the ethical considerations of using narrative to communicate science. Finally,
future intersections of narrative with ongoing questions in
science communication are introduced.

certain factors that distinguish narrative as a communication
format. Narratives follow a particular structure that describes the
cause-and-effect relationships between events that take place
over a particular time period that impact particular characters.
Although there exist more nuanced factors that scholars can use
to further determine the narrativity of a message (68), this triumvirate of causality, temporality, and character represents a
fairly standard definition of narrative communication. Such
a definition is independent of content and so narratives can be
present within almost any communication activity or media platform. Obvious examples include interpersonal conversation, entertainment television programs, and news profiles, but narratives
can also present themselves within larger messages as testimonials,
exemplars, case studies, or eyewitness accounts.
Narratives are often contrasted with other formats of communication, such as expository or argumentative communication
(7), or with other types of explanations, such as descriptive, deductive, or statistical (6). However, more generally, narratives are
often contrasted with the logical-scientific communication underlying most of the sciences (3, 9). Three areas in particular
where logical-scientific and narrative formats differ are in their
direction of generalizability, their reliance on context, and their
standards for legitimacy.
Logical-scientific communication aims to provide abstract truths
that remain valid across a specified range of situations. An individual may then use these abstract truths to generalize down to
a specific case and ideally provide some level of predictive power
regarding that specific. Narrative communication instead provides
a specific case from which an individual can generalize up to infer
what the general truths must be to permit such a specific to occur
(3, 10). In essence, the utilization of logical-scientific information
follows deductive reasoning, whereas the utilization of narrative
information follows inductive reasoning.
Logical-scientific communication is context-free in that it deals
with the understanding of facts that retain their meaning independently from their surrounding units of information. As
such, these facts represent the meaningful unit of content and can
be excised from a larger message and inserted into other messages, or even presented alone, with little loss of understanding.
In contrast, narrative communication is context-dependent because it derives it meaning from the ongoing cause-and-effect
structure of the temporal events of which it is comprised (1113).
As such, it is much harder to break a narrative into smaller
units of meaningful content without either greatly altering the

This paper results from the Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of
Sciences, The Science of Science Communication II, held September 2325, 2013, at the
National Academy of Sciences in Washington, DC. The complete program and video
recordings of most presentations are available on the NAS website at www.nasonline.
org/science-communication-II.
Author contributions: M.F.D. wrote the paper.

Narratives
Most individuals have an inherent understanding of what it
means to tell a story. Communication scholars supplement this
colloquial understanding of narrative through the articulation of
1361413620 | PNAS | September 16, 2014 | vol. 111 | suppl. 4

The author declares no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. D.A.S. is a guest editor invited by the
Editorial Board.
1

Email: mfd@iastate.edu.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1320645111

understanding of the smaller unit or rendering the original narrative incoherent (3).
Finally, because logical-scientific communication aims to provide general truths as an outcome, the legitimacy of its message is
judged on the accuracy of its claims. In contrast, because narrative communication instead aims to provide a reasonable depiction of individual experiences, the legitimacy of its message
is judged on the verisimilitude of its situations. This difference
confusingly allows logical-scientific communication and narrative
communication with opposing outcomes to be judged with equal
levels of truth (3), and partially explains why narratives can
rarely be effectively countered with facts (14).
Such differences have in part led to a framework claiming that
logical-scientific and narrative communication are not just contrasting formats of communication, but represent two distinct
cognitive pathways of comprehension (3, 15, 16). The paradigmatic pathway controls the encoding of science-based evidence,
whereas the narrative pathway controls the encoding of situation-based exemplars, leading to distinct differences in comprehension and understanding based on the pathway used to process
the content.
Empirical studies support such a categorical difference between paradigmatic and narrative processing, and suggest that
narrative processing is generally more efficient. Narratives are
often associated with increased recall, ease of comprehension, and
shorter reading times (17, 18). In a direct comparison with expository text, narrative text was read twice as fast and recalled
twice as well, regardless of topic familiarity or interest in the
content itself (19, 20). Graesser and Ottati (20) describe these and
similar results as suggesting that narratives have a privileged
status in human cognition. These benefits should not be assumed
to come from simplicity, as coherent narratives demand a high
level of complexity in both internal complexity and alignment to
cultural and social expectancies (15, 21). Instead, narratives seem
to offer intrinsic benefits in each of the four main steps of processing information: motivation and interest, allocating cognitive
resources, elaboration, and transfer into long-term memory (22).
As such, narrative cognition is thought to represent the default
mode of human thought, proving structure to reality and serving
as the underlying foundation for memory (18). This reliance on
narratives is suggested to be the result of an evolutionary benefit
because narratives provide their users with a format of comprehension to simulate possible realities (23), which would serve
to better predict cause-and-effect relationships and model the
thoughts of other humans in the complex social interactions that
define our species (24).
Such intrinsic benefits in comprehension could benefit the communication of science. Indeed, such a movement is underway within
the science education literature (7, 25). Responding to various calls
for reform in science education curriculum, some of which specifically note the potential of narrative formats for learning (26),
scholars are exploring how narratives may improve upon the
traditional ways science is taught. For example, Glaser et al. (22)
describe four factors that narratives offer, which could improve
knowledge acquisition about science compared with the traditional
expository curriculum, namely dramatization, emotionalization,
personalization, and fictionalization. Similarly, the capacity model
describes how both the narrative and educational components are
processed when narratives are used in service of science education.
Specifically, educational content that is more integral to the plotline
of the narrative requires less cognitive resources for comprehension
and leads to enhanced learning (27), a prediction that has found
empirical support elsewhere in narrative research (12, 13).
Similarly, health communication is another area exploring the
potential benefits of using narrative, often to better educate or
persuade individuals toward healthy behavior choices. Some
studies empirically examine the effects of narratives on perceptions of specific health issues, such as anticoagulant medication
Dahlstrom

(28), breast cancer (29), or vaccinations (2032), whereas others
take a broader view to justify the theoretical inclusion of narrative within health (33) or to provide a guide to its use (8). A
meta-analysis of many of these health-related narrative studies
found mixed results with regard to a net narrative effect (34),
although a lack of a consistent conceptualization of narrative
(35) likely complicates any generalization. Regardless of the
complexities involved, calls for more narrative within health
contexts continue to surface (36).
Although the benefits of including narrative into science education and health contexts remain under investigation, there is
another context where narratives have long been the norm in the
communication of science: the mass media.
Mass Media and Narratives
The mass media is especially relevant when considering the
communication of science because it represents the source from
which nonexpert audiences get most of its science information.
Because much of science is outside of direct experience, people
are dependent on others to inform and help them interpret information about science. Although many sources aim to fulfill
this role, including formal schooling, institutes of informal science
learning, or interpersonal discussion, none trump the ubiquity or
frequency of the mass media. As such, mass media content serves
as the primary source of information regarding science, health,
and environmental issues (5).
Science and Engineering Indicators is an ongoing 2-y report
produced by the National Science Foundation to document
trends surrounding science and engineering and its intersection
with the larger society. The most recent 2012 report (5) finds that
the primary source where Americans receive information about
science and technology is nearly tied between television (34%)
and the Internet (35%), with magazines and other print media
tied for a distant third and fourth (9%). Government agencies,
family, friends, and colleagues as sources for science information
only reached 3% when combined. When seeking information
about a particular science or technology topic, the Internet
becomes the primary source chosen (59%), with over half (52%)
of the online content being derived from traditional journalistic
sources. This reliance on mass media content for information
about science and technology is especially relevant for the current
discussion because the organizational and societal pressures surrounding the mass media make them intrinsically biased toward
the use of narratives.
Journalists must balance their dual goals of reporting objective
and accurate information while simultaneously remaining economically viable by earning and maintaining the fleeting attention of their audiences. In response to this challenge, media
messages are often packaged into familiar and predictable forms,
known as media logic or medialization, which have proven
successful in attracting the target audiences attention (37, 38).
Gatekeeping theory describes the upstream influences of organizational routines, external pressures, and internal goals of
media industries that shape the messages and formats that
eventually emerge for audience consumption (39, 40). The theory emphasizes that news stories are not preexisting units that
journalists merely select for transmission, but rather, reality
becomes news through a selective structuring that creates units
that fit the organizational needs, such as timing of creation, ease
of transmission, and audience expectations.
In particular, the concept of news values articulate specific foci
that have a better chance of attracting the attention of an audience. As such, news is packaged to match as many news values
as possible, while downplaying or even ignoring other relevant
aspects (41). Common news values include conflict, novelty,
geographic or cultural proximity to the audience, prominence of
individuals, impact or personal relevance to the audience, and
timeliness (41, 42).
PNAS | September 16, 2014 | vol. 111 | suppl. 4 | 13615

However, another important news value is one with clear links
to narrative: personification. Even when reporting on larger social forces, news media routinely personify abstract concepts for
dramatic storytelling, focusing on a particular individual or
smaller group within the larger context and exploring the consequences of their actions (41), a practice explored in detail
within exemplification theory (43). There are many reasons why
personification makes sense for news media. For the audience,
personification allows the audience a greater chance of identification and empathy compared with the larger aggregate and
aligns better with the Western expectation of individualism. For
the media, personification better meets the needs of news production, as it is easier to interview and photograph an individual
rather than something that represents larger social forces. Similarly, individual people generally act in a timespan that more
closely matches the frequency of news publication (41).
This narrative bias of the personification news value is evident
within the coverage of science. Health and biology are routinely
the most commonly covered science topics (5, 42), both of which
lend themselves to easier personification than the colder and
more abstract sciences. Badenschier and Wormer (42) interviewed editors of science sections in German newspapers and
content-analyzed the science coverage of their newspapers to
determine the specific news values that impact the coverage of
science. Although the authors argue that some of the standard
news values need to be amended for the specifics of science
coverage, personalization was found to remain one of the strong
predictors on the selection process of science news. Elliott (38)
found a similar bias toward personalization in the framing of
news media covering medical technologies.
Whereas informative news coverage often dominates the discussion of media dissemination of science, entertainment media
actually rises to greater importance when considering the overall
amount of content consumed. Entertainment media, such as
movies, television comedies and dramas, documentaries, novels,
and even video games, routinely use narrative formats. Although
most entertainment media may not be trying to inform audiences
about anything in particular, the combined influence of entertainment media has long been known to influence perceptions
about the real world.
Cultivation theory describes this influence of entertainment
narratives on public perceptions about the world (44). The
central tenants of the theory are that storytelling patterns in
entertainment media are designed to increase profit, not necessarily to accurately represent reality. Therefore, the narrative
worlds presented in entertainment media are systematically
skewed and individuals who are exposed to larger amounts of
these stories tend to internalize and share the beliefs and values
portrayed (45). For example, although less than 1% of Americans are victims of violent crime, 70% of broadcast network
television shows characters engaged as either a victim or perpetrator of such violence (45). Such a discrepancy has led to
a mean world syndrome, where heavy watchers of television
perceive the world to be a more dangerous place than it is
statistically (46).
Although much of cultivation research has focused on perceptions of violence or underrepresented groups, science-related
issues are also often explored through the lens of cultivation
theory, such as the environment (47, 48), biotechnology (49), and
perceptions of scientists themselves (50), with findings that, generally, audiences are influenced by the often-inaccurate portrayal
of science within entertainment narratives.
Whereas cultivation explores the effects of finished entertainment narratives, a recent study exploring how television
producers incorporate forensic science information into their
storytelling helps to shed light on the process of integrating
science into the narrative construction process. Kirby (51)
interviewed television writers and producers and reports that
13616 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1320645111

they often look to science to add realism to their stories, but
must use the science in a way that aligns with narrative conventions and their particular franchise to attract an audience.
Because the science must be used in service toward the larger
goal of storytelling, the producers and writers stress the need
for flexible realism or fictional conceit that permits them
to use science that is possible, regardless of its probability of
occurring. One of the interviewees, David Berman, the primary science consultant for the program CSI, said his team
doesnt want to get bogged down in what usually happens, but
what could happen (51). He stresses that scientific realism for
writers is about authenticity and plausibility, not accuracy.
Although there is no empirical measure of the proportion of
narrative to nonnarrative formats within mass media messages,
narratives align with the organizational and structural needs of
both informative and entertainment media systems and are
ubiquitous across most media platforms. As such, narratives
represent the dominant form of science communication nonexpert audiences are receiving. Therefore, questioning whether
narratives should be used to communicate science is somewhat
moot. A more relevant question would be: How should narratives be used to communicate science appropriately because of
their power to persuade?
Narrative Persuasion and Ethical Considerations
Narratives are intrinsically persuasive. Because they describe
a particular experience rather than general truths, narratives
have no need to justify the accuracy of their claims; the story
itself demonstrates the claim. Similarly, the structure of narrative
links its events into a cause-and-effect relationship, making the
conclusion of the narrative seem inevitable even though many
possibilities could have happened (52). This inevitability, combined with the lack of a need for justification, supports the many
normative elements with a storywhat is good, what is bad
without ever needing to clearly articulate or defend them (20).
Because narratives are able to provide values to real-world
objects without argument, it is difficult to counter their claims.
The field of narrative persuasion explores this persuasive side
of narratives, examining how audiences tend to accept normative
views presented in a narrative and the underlying mechanisms
that facilitate such persuasion. Results generally suggest that
audiences are more willing to accept normative evaluations from
narratives than from more logical-scientific arguments (53, 54),
and that a range of mediating and moderating factors influence
this tendency.
For example, engagement into the world of a narrative,
termed transportation, uses enough emotional and cognitive
resources that it is difficult for audiences to generate counterarguments against the evaluations to which they are exposed (4,
53). Similarly, the related field of exemplification theory finds
that when narrative and statistical information are both present
within a single message, such as in a news story that describes an
overall phenomenon but then also provides specific cases as
examples, perceptions skew toward the experiences of the specific cases regardless of whether the overall evaluations align or
not (55). One of the few factors that has been found to hinder
narrative persuasion is when the persuasive intent becomes
obvious and audiences react against being manipulated (56). As
long as such persuasive intent remains concealed, acceptance of
narrative evaluations is thought to represent the default outcome of exposure, where rejection is only possible with added
scrutiny afterward (4, 57).
Similar persuasive influences are found even if the audience
knows that the narrative in question is fictional (53). Fictional
narratives often contain elements within them that are truthful
(58), and individuals readily use information from fictional stories to answer questions about the world (59, 60). In fact, cultivation theory discussed in the previous section has been described
Dahlstrom

as the cumulative effect of long-term narrative persuasion from
fictional entertainment media (61).
The persuasiveness of narrative formats of communication can
both benefit science communication and create challenges. Research has shown that narratives can be used to sway beliefs about
numerous science topics, such as vaccines (62), proenvironmental
beliefs (12), and HIV/AIDS (63), and science communicators
could leverage the influence of narratives to persuade otherwise
resistant audiences about issues related to science. The National
Academy of Sciences Science and Entertainment Exchange represents one organization already using narratives for the benefit of
science communication (64). The Science and Entertainment Exchange connects science experts with entertainment writers and
producers to encourage frequent and accurate portrayals of
science within entertainment media narratives as a powerful
avenue of reaching the public with science content.
In contrast to such benefits, narratives can also perpetuate
misinformation and inaccuracies about science or about scientists themselves (65). Additionally, because narratives are
not subject to the same truth requirements as logical-scientific
communication (3), they are not easily countered. In fact,
accepted narratives are trusted so much that individuals rarely
allow evidence to contradict the narrative; evidence is altered
to fit their narratives (66).
Especially within the heated context of social controversies
regarding science, it may be tempting for science communicators
to rely on the covert persuasive influences of narrative to counter
misinformation and promote audiences acceptance of science.
However, the use of narratives within social controversies introduces unique ethical considerations. A recent paper explored
some of these ethical considerations and offered three questions
communicators should consider before using narratives to communicate science within social controversies (58).
The first ethical question asks if the underlying goal for using
narrative is for persuasion or comprehension. These two goals
represent contrasting roles for science communication within
society and generally align with one of two competing models.
The first is the Public Understanding of Science model that
considers controversies about science to be caused by a deficit
of scientific understanding, and the role of communication is
to rectify this deficit by educating the public and reducing the
controversy toward a predetermined outcome (67, 68). In contrast, the second model is the Public Engagement in Science and
Technology model that considers controversies about science a
necessary and beneficial process of aligning science with societal
values. In this model, the role of communication is to engage a
wider audience and increase the inclusion of science within the
debate, regardless of which side it is used to support (69, 70).
In other words, should science communication create agreement toward a preferred outcome or promote personal autonomy to make choices (58)? A narrative aiming to persuade could
exemplify the preferred side of the issue while championing
a character who is rewarded for making the right choices. In
contrast, a narrative aiming to increase comprehension could
exemplify how science influences multiple sides of an issue
through the eyes of a character who actively considers the options.
Both goals could be ethical in different circumstancespersonal
autonomy is often championed, but persuasion may be appropriate in contexts where social benefits are large enough to outweigh individual choiceso any narrative created needs to be
carefully aligned with the appropriate goal for the situation.
The second ethical question asks what levels of accuracy need
to be maintained within the narrative. Narratives contain multiple layers of accuracy that may or may not be necessary to
maintain, depending on the purpose of the communication.
Two layers in particular represent external realism and representativeness. External realism represents narrative elements that are accurate relative to the real world (71). When
Dahlstrom

creating a narrative, it is likely that certain elements will be
desired to accurately represent science in the real world;
however, it may still be appropriate to relax the accuracy
expectations on many of the other narrative elements for the
larger purposes of narrative structure. For example, a narrative
attempting to explain the process of converting grain to ethanol
may personify yeast as a picky character that refuses to eat its lunch
of sugar until it is comfortable at the right temperature (58). Obviously, such a cause-and-effect relationship is low on external realism, but the inputs and requirements of the procedure itself can
remain high on external realism and accurately describe the process
in an understandable and possibly memorable manner. Other elements within a narrative that may or may not need to be high on
external realism include types of characters, characters motivations
and actions, settings, situations, events, procedures, chronologies,
or time-frames (58).
Similarly, because narratives offer a specific example that will
be generalized outward, the representativeness of the example
used represents another potential layer of accuracy. Selecting
a worst-case scenario as the example around which to create
a narrative is likely not generalizable to what is likely to occur,
and is therefore representationally inaccurate. However, selecting a nonrepresentative narrative could be beneficial for a science communicator attempting to use narrative to persuade an
audience toward a predetermined end (58).
The third ethical question asks if narratives should be used at
all. It may be that nonexperts so align their expectation of how
scientists should communicate with the logical-scientific processing pathway, that an otherwise appropriate narrative may be
perceived as violating their normative expectations of science
communication. On the other hand, other communicators within
the issue will likely use narratives and it would be unethical not
to use narrative and surrender the benefits of a communication
technique to the nonexpert side of an issue (58).
To sum up the previous three sections, narratives represent
a potentially useful format of communication for the communication of science to nonexpert audiences. Narratives are
easier to process and generate more attention and engagement
than traditional logical-scientific communication. Narratives
already represent the format with which most nonexperts receive their information about science and narratives are intrinsically
persuasive, which presents both benefits and challenges for
science communication. The final section explores how narratives may intersect with ongoing and future discussions within
science communication.
Future Narrative Intersections with Science Communication
Although narratives have a long history of scholarly study (14,
72), their integration within a science context is fairly recent. As
such, existing discussions within the field of science communication may benefit from an inclusion of narrative constructs.
Building Trust. Trust is receiving growing attention as one of the
central issues in science communication. Even though overall trust in
science remains strong (5), many are pointing to a crisis in trust between the public and specific areas of science as an obstacle to successful science communication (73, 74). For example, survey data
suggest that trust in institutional actors matters more for the acceptance of technologies than individual knowledge or education levels
(75, 76). Similarly, the link between knowledge and concern about
climate change was found to depend upon levels of trust in scientists
(77). Although persuasion theories suggest peripheral source cues
that lend themselves to trustworthiness (78), developing trust in the
midst of more controversial science communication contexts
demands different tactics, but still remains challenging (74).
Even with the current emphasis on engaging the public within
science decision-making (79), little is known about the expectations that audiences hold with regard to how science should be
PNAS | September 16, 2014 | vol. 111 | suppl. 4 | 13617

communicated to them. Pielke discusses contrasting roles that
scientists can play within policy contexts (80), but what roles
do audiences accept as appropriate and in what contexts? Unknowingly violating such expectations could severely hinder
trust-building communication.
How does science communicated in narrative format influence
audience perceptions of trust? Do narratives increase trust because of their greater verisimilitude, or possibly because audiences appreciate information being packaged in an easier format
to comprehend? Or do narratives decrease trust because they are
seen as overly sensational or manipulative? What other factors,
personal or societal, alter the perceived trustworthiness of science narratives? For example, narrative communication may be
perceived as aligning more closely with certain roles within society and may be perceived, either centrally or heuristically, as
indicating certain motives of the science communicator. Recent
work has begun to explore how perceived motives influence the
processing of scientific information (81) but the influence of
narratives within a trust context remains unknown.
Potentially more complex is how trust is related to dueling
narratives claiming truth within the same science issue. Climate
change provides an obvious context where conflicting narratives
are present, including disjointed narratives of problem versus solution (82) and polarizing partisan narratives that substitute for
scientific understanding (83). In these cases, the questions shift
toward issues of how individuals select the most trusted narrative
from among available choices, and how the trustworthiness of
competing narratives is evaluated in light of the structure outlined
by the already-accepted narrative. When are conflicting narratives
simply rejected and when can certain elements from the competing narrative be incorporated to slightly modify the accepted
narrative? What conditions must be met to cause an individual to
lose trust in a previously accepted narrative?
Science Communication in a New Media Environment. The new
media environment is changing how science is communicated
to nonexperts. New media audiences are imbued with greater
power to seek, select, and share information that interests them
most. Similarly, in contrast to traditional informative reporting,
blogs and other newer platforms of communication mix fact and
opinion, with little need to differentiate between the two (84).
Although Internet use may be reducing gaps in science knowledge among groups of different educational levels (85), the new
metacontent that surrounds science information, such as comments, Facebook likes, or twitter mentions, can influence the
perceived quality of the science information itself (86).
How do science narratives compare with other formats of
science information within the new media environment? Will
science narratives better serve the needs of a new media audience,
floating to the top of the information pool to earn greater attention and dissemination through shared personal networks? A recent study examining the message factors that lead to increased
sharing suggests that this may be the case (87). Comparing the
features of the most emailed New York Times articles to those that
were not, Berger and Milkman (87) found that the biggest predictors of sharing content with others was that which was perceived as interesting, practical, surprising, and that evoked emotional reactions, many factors at which narratives excel.
Any influence of narratives in the new media environment is also
likely to increase in the future. As the new media environment
continues to increase the volume of potential messages available to
1. Katz Y (2013) Against storytelling of scientific results. Nat Methods 10(11):1045.
2. Polsby NW (1993) Where do you get your ideas? PS: Political Science and Politics 26(1):8387.
3. Bruner J (1986) Actual Minds, Possible Worlds (Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge,
MA), p 222.
4. Green MC (2006) Narratives and cancer communication. J Commun 56(Suppl 1):
S163S183.

13618 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1320645111

audiences and as audiences continue to morph into users able to
select and share their media messages of choice, the competition
for attention will intensify. Narratives may be recruited even more
frequently in an attempt to overcome this information explosion.
Communicating Beyond Human Scale. A relatively underexplored
area that nonetheless impacts science communication directly
concerns the challenges surrounding the communication of
phenomena that can never be directly experienced because of
the particular scale at which humans have evolved to perceive
reality (88). The field of grounded cognition suggests that human
cognitive processes evolved to facilitate practical interaction with
the surrounding environment, and are therefore biased toward
comprehension at this human scale (88, 89). However, science
routinely examines processes and phenomenon far removed
from human scale. Accurate values and explanations do little
to provide an intuitive sense of something as large as climate
change, as small as parts per billion, or as distant as 10,000 y
away. When attempting to understand such ideas, audiences
must take some relevant aspect of experience from human
scale and mentally extrapolate it past possible experience to
arrive a general perception of the phenomenon in question,
a perception on which they will the base their decision making.
Unfortunately, research suggests that the farther the perception is from human scale, the less accurate it is likely to be.
Risk probabilities using smaller denominators that are closer
to plausible group sizes in human society (x/125) allow easier
comprehension and are less influenced by message factors than
when the denominator represents a value larger than normal
human group sizes (x/100,000) (90). Construal theory explains
similar changes in perception based on scale, namely that an
event with greater psychological distance, and therefore farther
away from immediate human scale, leads to perceptions that are
more abstract and emotional than events with less psychological
distance (91, 92).
Common techniques to assist with the communication of
phenomena beyond human scale include developing metaphors
or other comparisons to link the phenomena to something understandable within human scale (93), such as describing nanotechnology as manipulating something a million times smaller
than the length of an ant (94). Although useful, such comparisons may introduce unintended associations (95) or merely repackage the same problem around a new concept. For example,
an ant represents something that can be experienced and is
therefore easy to bring to mind, but how easy is it to imagine
dividing an ant into a million parts?
Narratives may represent another promising and relatively
understudied communication tool for communicating beyond
human scale. Narratives represent mental simulation of some
aspect of reality from a particular human point of view (23).
Narratives, in essence, may represent a method of packaging
phenomena into human scale: providing a possible remedy for
the problems of communicating a meaningful sense of distant
science topics (88). No empirical studies have yet explored
this possibility.
In summary, storytelling within science should not be disregarded. The plural of anecdote is not data, remains an important mantra to uphold the rigor of systematic data collection.
However, when considering the communication of science to
nonexpert audiences, a more appropriate mantra might be, the
plural of anecdote is engaging science communication.
5. National Science Board (2012) Science and technology: Public attitudes and understanding.
Science and Engineering Indicators 2012 (National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA).
6. Norris SP, Guilbert SM, Smith ML, Hakimelahi S, Phillips LM (2005) A theoretical
framework for narrative explanation in science. Sci Educ 89(4):535563.
7. Avraamidou L, Osborne J (2009) The role of narrative in communicating science. Int J
Sci Educ 31(12):16831707.

Dahlstrom

8. Kreuter MW, et al. (2007) Narrative communication in cancer prevention and control:
A framework to guide research and application. Ann Behav Med 33(3):221235.
9. Fisher WR (1985) The narrative paradigm: In the beginning. J Commun 35(4):7489.
10. Strange JJ, Leung CC (1999) How anecdotal accounts in news and in fiction can influence judgments of a social problems urgency, causes, and cures. Pers Soc Psychol
Bull 25(4):436449.
11. Trabasso T, Sperry LL (1985) Causal relatedness and importance of story events. J Mem
Lang 24(5):595611.
12. Dahlstrom MF (2010) The role of causality in information acceptance in narratives: An
example from science communication. Communic Res 37(6):857875.
13. Dahlstrom MF (2012) The persuasive influence of narrative causality: Psychological
mechanism, strength in overcoming resistance, and persistence over time. Media
Psychol 15(3):303326.
14. Kreiswirth M (1992) Trusting the tale: The narrativist turn in the human sciences. New
Lit Hist 23(3):629657.
15. Monteagudo-Gonzalez J (2011) Jerome Bruner and the challenges of the narrative
turn. Then and now. Narrative Inq 21(2):295302.
16. Fisher WR (1984) Narration as a human-communication paradigm: The case of public
moral argument. Commun Monogr 51(1):122.
17. Zabrucky KM, Moore D (1999) Influence of text genre on adults monitoring of understanding and recall. Educ Gerontol 25(8):691710.
18. Schank RC, Abelson R (1995) Knowledge and memory: The real story. Knowledge and
Memory: The Real Story, ed Wyer RS (Lawrence Erlbaum, Hilldale, NJ), pp 186.
19. Graesser AC, Olde B, Klettke B (2002) How does the mind construct and represent
stories? Narrative Impact: Social and Cognitive Foundations, eds Green MC, Strange JJ,
Brock TC (Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ), pp 229262.
20. Graesser AC, Ottati V (1995) Why Stories? Some evidence, questions, and challenges.
Knowledge and Memory: The Real Story, ed Wyer RS (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
HIllsdale, NJ).
21. Bruner J (1991) The narrative construction of reality. Crit Inq 18(1):121.
22. Glaser M, Garsoffky B, Schwan S (2009) Narrative-based learning: Possible benefits
and problems. Communications-European Journal of Communication Research 34(4):
429447.
23. Oatley K (1999) Why fiction may be twice as true as fact: Fiction as cognitive and
emotional simulation. Rev Gen Psychol 3(2):101117.
24. Read SJ, Miller LC (1995) Stories are fundamental to meaning and memory: For social
creatures, could it be otherwise? Knowledge and Memory: The Real Story, ed Wyer RS
(Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ), pp 139152.
25. Klassen S (2010) The relation of story structure to a model of conceptual change in
science learning. Sci Educ 19(3):305317.
26. Reiss MJ, Millar R, Osborne J (1999) Beyond 2000: Science/biology education for the
future. J Biol Educ 33(2):6870.
27. Fisch SM (2000) A capacity model of childrens comprehension of educational content
on television. Media Psychol 2(1):6391.
28. Mazor KM, et al. (2007) Patient education about anticoagulant medication: Is narrative evidence or statistical evidence more effective? Patient Educ Couns 69(13):
145157.
29. Wise M, Han JY, Shaw B, McTavish F, Gustafson DH (2008) Effects of using online
narrative and didactic information on healthcare participation for breast cancer patients. Patient Educ Couns 70(3):348356.
30. Betsch C, Ulshfer C, Renkewitz F, Betsch T (2011) The influence of narrative v. statistical information on perceiving vaccination risks. Med Decis Making 31(5):742753.
31. Hopfer S (2012) Effects of a narrative HPV vaccination intervention aimed at reaching
college women: A randomized controlled trial. Prev Sci 13(2):173182.
32. Nan X, Dahlstrom MF, Richards AS, Rangarajan S (2014) Influence of evidence type
and narrative type on HPV risk perception and intention to obtain the HPV vaccine.
Health Commun, in press.
33. Hinyard LJ, Kreuter MW (2007) Using narrative communication as a tool for health
behavior change: A conceptual, theoretical, and empirical overview. Health Educ
Behav 34(5):777792.
34. Winterbottom A, Bekker HL, Conner M, Mooney A (2008) Does narrative information
bias individuals decision making? A systematic review. Soc Sci Med 67(12):20792088.
35. Shaffer VA, Zikmund-Fisher BJ (2013) All stories are not alike: A purpose-, content-,
and valence-based taxonomy of patient narratives in decision aids. Med Decis Making
33(1):413.
36. Cunningham RM, Boom JA (2013) Telling stories of vaccine-preventable diseases: Why
it works. S D Med (Spec no):2126.
37. McQuail D (2010) McQuails Mass Communication Theory (Sage Publications,
London), 6th Ed.
38. Elliott R (2012) The medialization of regenerative medicine: Frames and metaphors
in UK news stories. The Sciences Media ConnectionPublic Communication and Its
Repercussions, eds Rdder S, Franzen M, Weingart P (Springer, London), pp 87106.
39. Shoemaker PJ, Eichholz M, Kim E, Wrigley B (2001) Individual and routine forces in
gatekeeping. Journalism Mass Commun Q 78(2):233246.
40. Reese SD, Ballinger J (2001) The roots of a sociology of news: Remembering Mr. Gates
and social control in the newsroom. Journalism Mass Commun Q 78(4):641658.
41. Galtung J, Ruge MH (1965) The structure of foreign-newsThe presentation of the
Congo, Cuba and Cyprus crises in 4 Norwegian newspapers. J Peace Res 2(1):6491.
42. Badenschier F, Wormer H (2012) Issue selection in science journalism: Towards a
special theory of news values for science news? The Sciences Media Connection
Public Communication and Its Repercussions, eds Rdder S, Franzen M, Weingart P
(Springer, London), pp 5986.
43. Zillmann D (1999) Exemplification theory: Judging the whole by some of its parts.
Media Psychol 1(1):6994.

Dahlstrom

44. Gerbner G (1998) Telling stories, or how do we know what we know? The story of
cultural indicators and the cultural environment movement. Wide Angle; A Quarterly
Journal of Film History Theory Criticism & Practice 20(2):116131.
45. Shanahan J, Morgan M (1999) Televison and its Viewers; Cultivation Theory and Research (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
46. Gerbner G, Gross L (1976) Living with television: The violence profile. J Commun 26(2):
173199.
47. McComas K, Shanahan J, Butler JS (2001) Environmental content in prime-time network TVs non-news entertainment and fictional programs. Soc Nat Resour 14(6):
533542.
48. Dahlstrom MF, Scheufele DA (2010) Diversity of television exposure and its association
with the cultivation of concern for environmental risks. Environ Commun 4(1):5465.
49. Besley JC, Shanahan J (2005) Media attention and exposure in relation to support
for agricultural biotechnology. Sci Commun 26(4):347367.
50. Dudo A, et al. (2011) Science on television in the 21st century: Recent trends in
portrayals and their contributions to public attitudes toward science. Communic Res
38(6):754777.
51. Kirby DA (2013) Forensic fictions: Science, television production, and modern storytelling. Stud Hist Philos Biol Biomed Sci 44(1):92102.
52. Curtis R (1994) Narrative form and normative forceBaconian storytelling in popular
science. Soc Stud Sci 24(3):419461.
53. Green MC, Brock TC (2000) The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public
narratives. J Pers Soc Psychol 79(5):701721.
54. Slater MD, Rouner D (2002) Entertainment-education and elaboration likelihood:
Understanding the processing of narrative persuasion. Commun Theory 12(2):
173191.
55. Gibson R, Zillmann D (1994) Exaggerated versus representative exemplification in
news reportsPerceptions of issues and personal consequences. Communic Res 21(5):
603624.
56. Moyer-Guse E, Nabi RL (2010) Explaining the effects of narrative in an entertainment
television program: Overcoming resistance to persuasion. Hum Commun Res 36(1):
2652.
57. Gerrig RJ (1993) Experiencing Narrative Worlds: On the Psychological Activities of
Reading (Westview Press, Boulder, CO).
58. Dahlstrom MF, Ho SS (2012) Ethical considerations of using narrative to communicate
science. Sci Commun 34(5):592617.
59. Appel M, Richter T (2007) Persuasive effects of fictional narratives increase over time.
Media Psychol 10(1):113134.
60. Marsh EJ, Meade ML, Roediger HL (2003) Learning facts from fiction. J Mem Lang
49(4):519536.
61. Bilandzic H, Busselle RW (2008) Transportation and transportability in the cultivation
of genre-consistent attitudes and estimates. J Commun 58(3):508529.
62. Brodie M, et al. (2001) Communicating health information through the entertainment media. Health Aff (Millwood) 20(1):192199.
63. Vaughan PW, Rogers EM, Singhal A, Swalehe RM (2000) Entertainment-education
and HIV/AIDS prevention: A field experiment in Tanzania. J Health Commun 5(Suppl):
81100.
64. National Academy of Sciences (2013) The Science and Entertainment Exchange.
Available at www.scienceandentertainmentexchange.org. Accessed April 17, 2014.
65. Barriga CA, Shapiro MA, Fernandez ML (2010) Science information in fictional movies:
Effects of context and gender. Sci Commun 32(1):324.
66. McComas K, Shanahan J (1999) Telling stories about global climate changeMeasuring the impact of narratives on issue cycles. Communic Res 26(1):3057.
67. Miller JD, Kimmel L (2001) Biomedical Communications: Purposes, Audiences, and
Strategies (John Wiley, New York).
68. Miller JD, Pardo R, Niwa F (1997) Public Perceptions of Science and Technology:
A Comparative Study of the European Union, the United States, Japan, and Canada
(Chicago Academy of Sciences, Chicago).
69. Dickson D (2001) Weaving a social web. Nature 414(6864):587587.
70. Walker G, Simmons P, Irwin A, Wynne B (1999) Risk communication, public participation and the Seveso II directive. J Hazard Mater 65(12):179190.
71. Busselle RW, Bilandzic H (2008) Fictionality and perceived realism in experiencing
stories: A model of narrative comprehension and engagement. Commun Theory
18(2):255280.
72. Kreiswirth M (2000) Merely telling stories? Narrative and knowledge in the human
sciences. Poetics Today 21(2):293318.
73. Wynne B (2006) Public engagement as a means of restoring public trust in science
Hitting the notes, but missing the music? Community Genet 9(3):211220.
74. Goodwin J, Dahlstrom MF (2014) Communication strategies for earning trust in
climate change debates. WIREs Climate Change 5(1):151160.
75. Priest SH (2001) Misplaced faithCommunication variables as predictors of encouragement for biotechnology development. Sci Commun 23(2):97110.
76. Priest SH, Bonfadelli H, Rusanen M (2003) The trust gap hypothesis: Predicting
support for biotechnology across national cultures as a function of trust in actors. Risk
Anal 23(4):751766.
77. Malka A, Krosnick JA, Langer G (2009) The association of knowledge with concern
about global warming: trusted information sources shape public thinking. Risk Anal
29(5):633647.
78. Pornpitakpan C (2004) The persuasiveness of source credibility: A critical review of
five decades evidence. J Appl Soc Psychol 34(2):243281.
79. Einsiedel E (2008) Public engagement and dialogue: A research review. Handbook of
Public Communication on Science and Technology, eds Bucchi M, Smart B (Routledge,
London), pp 173184.
80. Pielke RA (2007) The Honest Broker: Making Sense of Science in Policy and Politics
(Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).

PNAS | September 16, 2014 | vol. 111 | suppl. 4 | 13619

81. Rabinovich A, Morton TA, Birney ME (2012) Communicating climate science: The role
of perceived communicators motives. J Environ Psychol 32(1):1118.
82. Randall R (2009) Loss and climate change: The cost of parallel narratives. Ecopsychology 1(3):118129.
83. Kahan DM (2012) Why we are poles apart on climate change. Nature 488(7411):255.
84. Brossard D (2013) New media landscapes and the science information consumer. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 110(Suppl 3):1409614101.
85. Cacciatore MA, Scheufele DA, Corley EA (2013) Another (methodological) look at
knowledge gaps and the Internets potential for closing them. Public Underst Sci.
86. Anderson AA, Brossard D, Scheufele DA, Xenos MA, Ladwig P (2013) The nasty effect: Online incivility and risk perceptions of emerging technologies. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 19(3):373387.
87. Berger J, Milkman KL (2012) What makes online content viral? J Mark Res 49(2):192205.
88. Dahlstrom MF, Ritland R (2012) The problem of communicating beyond human scale.
Between Scientists and Citizens, ed Goodwin J (Great Plains Society for the Study of
Argumentation, Ames, IA), pp 121130.

13620 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1320645111

89. Kaschak MP, Maner JK (2009) Embodiment, evolution, and social cognition: An integrative framework. Eur J Soc Psychol 39(7):12361244.
90. Garcia-Retamero R, Galesic M (2011) Using plausible group sizes to communicate
information about medical risks. Patient Educ Couns 84(2):245250.
91. McCarthy RJ, Skowronski JJ (2011) Youre getting warmer: Level of construal affects the
impact of central traits on impression formation. J Exp Soc Psychol 47(6):13041307.
92. Trope Y, Liberman N, Wakslak C (2007) Construal levels and psychological distance:
Effects on representation, prediction, evaluation, and behavior. J Consum Psychol
17(2):8395.
93. Baake K (2003) Metaphor and Knowledge: The Challenges of Writing Science (State
Univ of New York Press, New York, NY).
94. National Nanotechnology Initiative (2014) Nanotechnology 101. Available at www.
nano.gov/nanotech-101. Accessed April 17, 2014.
95. Weigmann K (2004) The code, the text and the language of God. When explaining
science and its implications to the lay public, metaphors come in handy. But their
indiscriminant use could also easily backfire. EMBO Rep 5(2):116118.

Dahlstrom

