before the covid 19 pandemic, progress had been made in many health areas, including improving the health of mothers and children, increasing immunization coverage and reducing the incidence of communicable diseases, albeit not fast enough to meet the goal 3 targets by 2030. the disruption caused by the pandemic has now halted progress and even reversed some gains made. according to a recent survey, substantial disruptions persist more than a year into the pandemic, with about 90 per cent of countries and territories still reporting one or more disruptions to essential health services. among the health services most extensively affected are those for mental, neurological and substance use disorders; neglected tropical diseases; tuberculosis; hiv and hepatitis b and c; cancer screening; services for other non communicable diseases, including hypertension and diabetes; family planning and contraception; urgent dental care; malnutrition; immunization; and malaria. fund to fight aids, tuberculosis and malaria, the gavi alliance and the united states of america accounted for more than half of that total, providing $2.4 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively. in 2019, $3.4 billion was spent on basic health care, $2.2 billion on infectious disease control, excluding hiv/aids, and $2.2 billion on malaria control. health workers are on the front line of the covid 19 pandemic response. countries and territories, especially those with a limited health workforce, are further constrained with regard to the delivery of essential health services. on the basis of data from the period 2013–2018, the density of nursing and midwifery personnel in northern america is more than 150 per 10,000 population, which is more than 15 times that in sub saharan african and 8 times that in northern africa and southern asia. the density of medical doctors in northern america, oceania and central asia remains around 25 per 10,000 population, compared to 2 per 10,000 population in sub saharan african.