See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327019925

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and
opportunities
Article in International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering  July 2018
DOI: 10.25165/j.ijabe.20181104.4475

CITATIONS

READS

35

1,186

11 authors, including:
Kai hu

Yingkuan Wang

Jiangnan University

Chinese Academy of Agricultural Engineering, Ministry of Agriculture (PRC)

35 PUBLICATIONS 318 CITATIONS

29 PUBLICATIONS 1,365 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Min Huang
166 PUBLICATIONS 4,247 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Qibing Zhu
Jiangnan University
70 PUBLICATIONS 1,225 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Editor-in-Chief, International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering View project

Deep Learning and Applications View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Ya Guo on 14 August 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

32

July, 2018

Int J Agric & Biol Eng

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

Vol. 11 No.4

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications,
and opportunities
Nanyang Zhu1,2, Xu Liu1,2, Ziqian Liu1,2, Kai Hu1,2, Yingkuan Wang3, Jinglu Tan4, Min Huang1,
Qibing Zhu1, Xunsheng Ji1, Yongnian Jiang5, Ya Guo1,2,4*
(1. Key Laboratory of Advanced Process Control for Light Industry, Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China;
2. School of Internet of Things, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China;
3. Chinese Academy of Agricultural Engineering, Beijing 100125, China;
4. Department of Bioengineering, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA;
5. Jiangsu Zhongnong IoT Technology Co., LTD, Yixing 214200, China)
Abstract: In recent years, Deep Learning (DL), such as the algorithms of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), has been widely studied and applied in various fields
including agriculture. Researchers in the fields of agriculture often use software frameworks without sufficiently examining
the ideas and mechanisms of a technique. This article provides a concise summary of major DL algorithms, including
concepts, limitations, implementation, training processes, and example codes, to help researchers in agriculture to gain a holistic
picture of major DL techniques quickly. Research on DL applications in agriculture is summarized and analyzed, and future
opportunities are discussed in this paper, which is expected to help researchers in agriculture to better understand DL algorithms
and learn major DL techniques quickly, and further to facilitate data analysis, enhance related research in agriculture, and thus
promote DL applications effectively.
Keywords: deep learning, smart agriculture, neural network, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks,
generative adversarial networks, artificial intelligence, image processing, pattern recognition
DOI: 10.25165/j.ijabe.20181104.4475
Citation: Zhu N Y, Liu X, Liu Z Q, Hu K, Wang Y K, Tan J L, et al. Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools,
applications, and opportunities. Int J Agric & Biol Eng, 2018; 11(4): 3244.

1 Introduction
A standard artificial neural network (ANN) model consists of
many neurons (connected processors), each producing a sequence
of real-valued activations [1].
When sensors perceive
environment changes, input neurons will be activated and other
neurons will then get activated through weighted connections
from previously active neurons. Depending on the specific
problem and the neuron topology, these behaviors may require
long chains of computational stages, where each of the stage
transforms the aggregate activation of the network. DL is about
how to accurately assign credit across many such stages [2].
Deep learning allows computational models that are composed of
Received date: 2018-06-16
Accepted date: 2018-07-23
Biographies: Nanyang Zhu, Master candidate, research interests: IoT, Email:
zhunanyang08@163.com; Xu Liu, Undergraduate, research interests: IoT, Email:
francislucien2017@126.com; Ziqian Liu, Undergraduate, research interests: IoT,
Email: jolley1074@gmail.com; Kai Hu, PhD, research interests: cartography
and geographic information engineering, Email: hukai_wlw@ jiangnan.edu.cn;
Yingkuan Wang, PhD, Professor, research interests: agricultural mechanization
and information, Email: wangyk@agri.gov.cn; Jinglu Tan, PhD, Professor,
research interests: bioengineering, Email: tanj@missouri.edu; Min Huang,
PhD, Professor, research interests: control theory and engineering, Email:
huangmzqb@163.com; Qibing Zhu, PhD, Professor, research interests:
mechanical engineering, Email: zhuqib@163.com; Xunsheng Ji, PhD, Professor,
research interests: precision instrumentation and mechanical engineering, Email:
jixunsheng@163.com; Yongnian Jiang, CEO of Jiangsu Zhongnong IoT
Technology Co., LTD, Email: jxrjyn@126.com;
*Corresponding Author: Ya Guo, PhD, Professor, research interest:
bioengineering. Room C510, School of IoT Engineering, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi 214122, China, Tel: +86-15706185006, Email: guoy@jiangnan.edu.cn.

multiple processing layers to represent data with multiple levels
of abstraction. Great improvements of the method can be found
in many research domains.
The concept of BP (Back
Propagation) Neural Network is the basis for many DL
algorithms.
With massive enthusiasm pouring into the DL field, great
improvements have been achieved in recent years. DL has drawn
a lot of attention in agriculture. One of its applications in
agriculture is image recognition, which has conquered a lot of
obstacles that limit fast development in robotic and mechanized
agro-industry and agriculture[3]. These improvements can be seen
in many aspects of agriculture, such as plant disease detection,
weed control, and plant counting. Researchers in agriculture may
not be experienced programmers. They often directly use publicly
available software frameworks for deep learning without carefully
examining the learning mechanisms used. An understanding of
DL algorithms can facilitate data analysis and thus enhance
research in agriculture. Although various commercial software
frameworks are available, there is a lack of a systematic summary
of major DL algorithms[3], including concepts, application
limitations, flow charts, and example codes, which can help
researchers in agriculture to learn major DL techniques quickly and
use them effectively.
In order to provide a holistic picture of DL to researchers in
agriculture fields and enhance modern smart agriculture
development, this work summarizes BP and common DL
algorithms (Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN), and Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN)) and their applications in agriculture, with a focus on

July, 2018

Zhu N Y, et al.

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities

applications published in the last three years. Example codes for
BP, CNN, RNN, and GAN in Python are also provided.

2 Common deep learning algorithms

Vol. 11 No.4

33

Output layer output:
h

ok  f o (netko )  f o ( wki ai  bok )

(4)

i 1

CNN, RNN, and GAN are the most commonly used DL
algorithms. There are many other sub-category DL algorithms,
such as VGGNet[4], ConvNets[5], LSTM[6,7] and DCGAN[8,9]. It is
unfeasible to include all of them in one summary. They can be
derived from the three common DL algorithms directly or
indirectly[10]. Understanding the three common DL algorithms is
very helpful for learning the sub-category DL algorithms.
Therefore, the sub-category DL algorithms are not reviewed with
details. The concept of backpropagation (BP) is the basis for
many ANN although itself does not mean a deep network. It thus
will be introduced in this section first.
2.1 Feedforward Neural Network and Backpropagation (BP)
An example structure of feedforward neural network based on
backpropagation or BP neural network is shown in Figure 1. It is
a supervised learning algorithm using error back propagation,
composed of multiple layers of hidden neurons in full connection.
This means that a layer of neurons is connected to an upper layer of
neurons and each layer has an activation function to limit the
output of amplitude of neurons by linear or nonlinear
transformation of the input of the afferent neuron. Hidden
neurons can learn the salient features of training data from
continuous forward propagation[11].

Cost function:
For neural networks, the cost function plays an important role
in optimizing the model parameters (weights and thresholds). A
cost function is a measure of the error between the predicted
output and the actual output for the training samples. The
training process gradually reduces the value of the cost function
by the gradient descent. There are two types of cost function
expressions. One is a quadratic loss function[11], and the other is
a cross-entropy loss function [12]. Here, the quadratic loss
function E is used as an example to demonstrate BP and it is
expressed as Equation (5):

E

1 s
1 s
(d k  ok ) 2   (d k  f o (netko )) 2

2 k 1
2 k 1
2

h
r
1 s
 [d k  f o ( wki f h ( vij p j  bhj )  bok )]
2 k 1
k 1
j 1

(5)

Backpropagation is based on the gradient descend of the cost
function and the chain rule of differentiation [13], whose
conceptual structure is shown in Figure 2. First, there is a need
to differentiate the weights of the cost function to get an error
value, then backpropagate the error value. During this process,
there is a need to constantly adjust and update the weights and
thresholds.

Figure 1 Example structure of a BP neural network

Figure 2 Concept of backpropagation

Assuming that there is a set of training data {(p1, d1), (p2,
2
d ), , (pr, ds)}. [vij]hr is the weights between neuron code h and
neuron code r. bh denotes the threshold in neuron code h, (d1,
d2, , ds) denotes code output. netih is the input of the first
hidden layer. ai is the output of the first hidden layer, and fh is the
activation function of the first hidden layer. netko is the input of
the output layer. fo is the activation function of the output layer.
ok is the output of the output layer. The output of each neuron
code is determined by the output of previous neuron. The major
formulations for the algorithm can be listed as Equations (1)-(4).
Input layer to hidden layer input:

Assuming that:
wki - weight adjustment (local gradient) from the output layer
to the hidden layer,
bok - threshold adjustment (local gradient) from the output
layer to the hidden layer,
vij - weight adjustment (local gradient) from the hidden layer
to the input layerand
bhj - threshold adjustment (local gradient) from the hidden
layer to the input layer.
The major formulations of backpropagation algorithm can be
listed as Equations (6)-(9).
Weight and threshold adjustment (local gradient) from the
hidden layer to the output layer:

r

neti h   vij p j  bhj

(1)

j 1

Hidden layer output:

wki   

r

ai  f h (netih )  f h ( vij p j  bhj )

(2)

j 1

h

i 1

(3)

(6)

E
   (d k  ok )  fo (netko )
(7)
bok
Weight and threshold adjustment (local gradient) from the
input layer to the hidden layer:
bok   

Output layer input:

netko   wki ai  bok

E
   (dk  ok )  fo (netko )  ai
wki

34

July, 2018

vij   

Int J Agric & Biol Eng
s
E
   {[ (d k  ok )  fo (netko )  wki ] 
vij
k 1

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

(8)

f h (netih )}  p j

bhj   

s
E
   [ (dk  ok )  f o (netko )  wki ]  f h (netih )
bhj
k 1

(9)
In the process of backpropagation, the weights and thresholds
are adjusted by reversing the value of error [14]. A flowchart of the
BP algorithm is shown in Figure 3.

Vol. 11 No.4

with each convolutional layer is hw3. The threshold of
convolutional layer is b. The size of new image feature X after
convolution calculation is H_newW_new, whose convolutional
layer computation process is shown in Figure 4. For each
convolutional layer, the number of convolution kernels determines
the number of output feature maps or the number of inputs in the
pooling layer. To identify the edge information of an image, the
method of zero-padding in which zero is added to the border of the
input vector is applied and the size of zero-padding is P. It is also
vital for convolution calculation to set a suitable stride with size
S[20] during the process of calculating convolution in the
convolutional layer.
The major formulations are listed as
Equations (10)-(12).
3

X _ new  X  W   ( X k  Wk )  b

(10)

k 1

H  h  2 P
1
S
W  w  2 P
W _ new 
1
S
H _ new 

(11)
(12)

Figure 3 Flowchart of the BP programming
BP neural networks have many merits, including strong
nonlinear mapping capabilities and high degree of self-learning and
self-adaptability. They are widely applied in many fields such as
speech analysis, image recognition, digital watermarking, and
computer vision. They solve many problems that cannot be done
by traditional machine learning algorithms. Its classification
function is particularly suitable for applications in pattern
recognition[15] and classification[16]. Nevertheless, the networks
used for object recognition or natural language processing contain
thousands of hidden units, which bring exponentially increasing
number of parameters. BP neural networks may fall into local
minima in practical applications. Thus, how to select typical
samples from training data is an unsolved problem when massive
amounts of complex data are available. The traditional BP neural
networks are no longer sufficiently effective in some areas.
Hence, deep networks such as CNN, RNN, and GAN have caught
increasing attention.
2.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
CNN is a deep learning algorithm composed of multiple
convolutional layers, pooling layers, and fully connected layers,
which has resulted in many breakthroughs in speech recognition,
face recognition, natural language processing and so on [17]. The
structure composed of the convolutional layers and the pooling
layers is for feature extraction and the fully connected layers
function as a classifier. BP neural networks mainly map features
through the network to specific values, whereas convolutional
networks first convert signals into features and then map the
features to a specific target value[18].
Convolutional Layer:
Assuming that an RGB image is taken as input X and there are
six convolution kernels W[19]. The image size is an HW3
three-dimensional matrix. The convolution kernel size associated

Figure 4 Convolutional layer computation process
Pooling Layer:
The function of the pooling layer is to compress the input
tensor and reduce the size of the input data, which means changing
each nn submatrix of the input image into one specific element
value. There are two common pooling methods: maximum
pooling and mean pooling.
Maximum pooling takes the
maximum of the corresponding nn area as the pooled element
value and mean pooling takes the average value of the
corresponding nn area as the pooled element value. The input
volume for the pooling layer is WHD, the output volume for the
pooling layer is W_poolingH_poolingD_pooling[20].
The
pooling layer computation process is shown in Figure 5. Besides,
the pooling layer requires two hyper parameters: the spatial extent f
and the stride size s. The major formulations are listed as
Equations (13)-(15):

W_ pooling  (W  f ) / s  1

(13)

H _ pooling  ( H  f ) / s  1

(14)

D_ pooling  D

(15)

A flowchart of the CNN algorithm is shown in Figure 6.
CNN simulates the behavior of human brain processing of
signals and combines feature extraction in image processing with
BP neural networks. CNN has fewer parameters than deep
networks because of its local perception mechanism and parameter
sharing mechanism which can reduce parameters. CNN can
handle high-dimensional arrays, especially for image classification.
Many data modalities are in the form of multiple arrays. CNN has

July, 2018

Zhu N Y, et al.

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities

unique advantages in natural language processing[21], face
recognition[22], and image processing because of its special
structures shared by local weights. Its layout is closer to the
actual biological neural network. Nevertheless, CNN needs a lot
of training samples.

Vol. 11 No.4

35

(16)
ht  f (u  xt  w  ht 1  b1 )
The predicted output of recurrent neural network at time t:
ot = f(vht +b2)
(17)
Recurrent neural network error at time t:
l = ot  yt
(18)
A flowchart for RNN programming is shown in Figure 8.

Figure 5 Pooling layer computation process

Figure 7

Recurrent neural network propagation process

Figure 6 Flowchart of CNN programming
2.3 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
RNN can mine temporal information and semantic information
and has achieved breakthroughs in time series analysis, speech
recognition and language modeling. RNN is a variant of ANN,
which means that the current input of the network is related to the
output of the previous moment. The specific manifestation is that
the network will remember the previous information and apply it to
the current network output calculation; in other words, RNN can be
treated as BP neural network of which the output will be used as
the input of the next network[19].
As Figure 7 shows, xt represents the input of training data at
the time t, ht represents the hidden state at the time t, which is
determined by the current input xt and the previous hidden layer
state ht-1. ot denotes the output of hidden layer at the time t. l is
the error at the current time t, which is determined by the ot and the
true output of the training data yt. u, w, v are the weights of
recurrent neural network and are shared across the recurrent neural
networks. b1 and b2 are the thresholds of recurrent neural network
and are shared across the recurrent neural networks[23], f is the
activation function of the hidden layer, whose network structure
propagation process is shown in Figure 7.
The specific
formulations are listed as Equations (16)-(18).
Hidden state value at time t:

Figure 8 Flowchart of RNN programming
Although RNN solves the problems of time series theoretically,
it is difficult to solve the problems of long time series due to the
length of information varies in practical applications, which can
cause gradients to disappear or to explode. Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) network[24] is an improvement of the recurrent
neural network, which is mainly designed to solve time series
problems with long intervals and long delays. LSTM depends on
the structure of some doors to selectively affect the state of the
moment in the recurrent neural network. LSTM network has been
used in speech recognition[25], machine translation[26] and other
fields.
2.4 Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
The ingenuity of GAN lies in its design. Technically, it is a
combination of existing algorithms of BP. GAN is a way that a
set of noise is used to learn the distribution of the real data and to
generate new data. The structure of this network consists of two
models, a generation model which is to capture the distribution of

36

July, 2018

Int J Agric & Biol Eng

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

the real data, and a discrimination model which is similar to a
binary classifier[27].
Assuming that the generation model is a deep neural network
which generates a new vector called fake data G(z) and the
discrimination model is a fully connected network which obtains a
probability value D(z) reflecting real data set. x is a real data
set[28], y is the output of the distribution model, Ed is the loss
function of discrimination model, Eg is the loss function of
generation model, E is the loss function of the entire network,
whose network structure is shown in Figure 9 and the major
formulations for the loss function are listed as Equations (19)-(24).
Discrimination model loss function Ed :
(19)
Ed  ((1  y)log(1  D(G( z)))  y log D( x))
Generation model loss function Eg:

Eg  (1  y)log(1  D(G( z)))(2  D(G( z)  1))

(20)

Total network loss function E:
E  (1  y)log(1  D(G( z)))(2  D(G( z))  1)

(21)

After the loss functions are obtained, the network is optimized
by us V(D,G),the optimization function:
min max V ( D, G)  Ex ~ pdata ( x ) [log D( x)] 
G
D
(22)
Ez ~ pz ( z ) [log(1  D(G( z )))]
The expressions above can be divided into two functions:
discrimination model optimization function and generation model
optimization function.
Discrimination model optimization function:

maxV ( D, G)  Ex ~ pdata ( x ) [log D( x)]  Ez ~ pz ( z ) [log(1  D(G( z)))]
D

(23)
Generation model optimization function:

Vol. 11 No.4

minV ( D, G)  Ez ~ pz ( z ) [log(1  D(G( z)))]
G

(24)

According to the above, it can be observed that the
optimization of the discrimination model and the optimization of
the generation model are independent of each other.

Figure 9

Generative adversarial networks structure

The power of generative adversarial networks (GAN) lies in
the ability to automatically learn the distribution of real sample data.
Deep convolutional generative adversarial networks (DCGAN)
resulting from the rise of convolutional neural network is widely
used in image processing such as image restoration from split
image, dynamic scene generation[29], image generation[30], and
resolution enhancement[31].
In addition, DCGAN plays an
important role in face detection and recognition [32]. However, it is
difficult to train a GAN due to entail synchronization of generation
model and discrimination model, and there is room for further
development of GAN applications.
A flowchart for GAN programming is shown in Figure 10.
A summary of BP, CNN, RNN, and GAN is shown in Table 1.
Codes of BP, CNN, RNN, and GAN in Python are provided in
the supplemental files.

Figure 10 Flowchart of GAN programming

July, 2018

Zhu N Y, et al.

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities

Table 1 Summary of BP, CNN, RNN, and GAN
Type

BP

CNN

RNN

GAN

Example
references
Rumelhart

[33]

LeCun[34]
Krizhevsky[35]

Mikolov[36]
Sundermeyer[37]
[28]

Goodfellow

Variants

Network
structure

Applications

RBF
GRNN

Input layer
Output layer
Hidden layer

Data fitting
Pattern recognition
Classification

LeNet,
AlexNet
VggNet

Input layer
Convolution layer
Pooling layer
Full connected layer

Image processing
Speech signal
Natural Language
Processing

Input layer
Hidden layer
Output layer

Time series analysis
Emotion analysis
Natural Language
Processing

LSTM

Discrimination model
DCGAN
Generation model

Image generation
Video generation

3 Deep learning frameworks
TensorFlow and Caffe are two commonly-used DL
frameworks, which allow users to use DL without significant
programming.
The most popular TensorFlow and Caffe
frameworks are introduced below briefly.
3.1 TensorFlow
TensorFlow is an open source computing framework of
Google that supports deep learning algorithms, including CNN,
RNN, GAN and other variants, which can be used on Linux,
Windows, and Mac platforms. TensorFlow has some advantages
including high flexibility, true portability, multi-language support,
rich algorithm library, and excellent documentation. TensorFlow
provides a very rich set of deep learning application programming
interfaces (API) including basic vector matrix calculations,
optimization algorithms, convolutional neural networks, recurrent
neural networks, and visual aids. TensorFlow uses dataflow
graphs to represent computation, shared state, and the operations
that mutate state. It maps the nodes of a dataflow graph across
multiple computational devices, such as multi-core CPUS,
general-purpose GPUS, and custom-designed ASICs, which are
known as Tensor Processing Units (TPUS)[38].
A deep learning model, typically a multi-layer neural network,
is composed of several computational layers that process data in a
hierarchical fashion. Each layer takes an input and produces an
output, often computed as a non-linear function or a weighted
linear function of a weighted linear combination of the input values.
It is particularly popular that convolutional layers apply a local
function or filter to all subsets of the layers input, such as portions
of an image[39].
3.2 Caffe
Convolution Architecture For Feature Extraction (Caffe) is the
first deep learning framework that has been widely used in industry
as an open source. The Caffe model and the corresponding
optimizing methods are given as texts instead of codes. Caffe
gives the definition of the model, optimal settings, and pre-training
weights. Caffe handles massive data with high speed. Besides,
Caffe can be modular which easily extended to new tasks. Users
can define their own models using the types of neuron layers
provided by Caffe.
Caffe provides multimedia scientists and practitioners with a
clean and modifiable framework for state-of-the-art deep learning
algorithms and a collection of reference models. The framework
is a BSD-licensed C++ library with Python and MATLAB bindings
for training and deploying general-purpose convolutional neural
networks and other deep learning models efficiently on varied
architectures[40].

Vol. 11 No.4

37

A comparison between TensorFlow and Caffe can be found in
Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison between Tensorflow and Caffe

4

Traits

TensorFlow

Caffe

Support language

C++, Python

C++, Python, MATLAB

Support system

Linux, Mac OS X, Android,
IOS

Linux, Mac OS X,
Windows

Data input format

Data, ImageData

Feeding, Data from a file,
Preloaded data

Support model

CNN, RNN, GAN

CNN

Loss function

Cross-entropy loss function
Mean squared error

Contrative loss, Hingle
loss, Softmax loss

Recent applications of DL in smart agriculture

Recent applications of CNN, RNN, and GAN in smart
agriculture are summarized in this section.
4.1 CNN applications in smart agriculture
CNN has strong capability in image processing, which makes
it widely used in agriculture research. Generally speaking, most
applications of DL in agriculture can be categorized as plant or
crop classification, which is vital for pest control, robotic
harvesting, yield prediction, disaster monitoring etc.
Plant disease detection is time-consuming when it is done
manually.
Fortunately, with the development of artificial
intelligence, plant disease detection can be accomplished through
image processing. Plant disease recognition models are mostly
based on leaf image classification and pattern recognition [41]. A
novel DL framework developed by the Berkley Vision and
Learning Centre was used to build a plant disease detection model.
The model is able to recognize 13 different types of plant diseases
out of healthy leaves, with the ability to distinguish plant leaves
from their surroundings[42]. In another research of using DL in
detection of plant diseases, the overall accuracy may reach 95.8%
after 100 training iterations and may be improved to 96.3% after
further fine-tuning. The results are actually better than manual
detection[43]. All these proved that DL has very impressive
performance in detecting plant diseases.
As many countries across the world have been developing
initiatives to build national agriculture monitoring network systems,
plant classification and weed identification are particularly
important because of the implications for automating agriculture.
Since image recognition can be applied to detect plenty of features
of plants, CNN has been extensively used to detect weeds or
classify plants[44-48]. In 2017, a new approach that combined CNN
and K-means feature learning was proposed for weed identification
and control. Manual design features in weed identification may
cause unstable identification results and weak generalization ability
in feature extraction. Thus, the application of DL and K-means
pre-training resulted in an accuracy of identification of 92.89% [44].
One of the pre-trained CNN architecture that is widely used for
plant classification is AlexNet. Experimental results based on
AlexNet from the Istanbul Technical University in 2017 suggest
that the CNN architecture outperforms machine learning algorithms
that are based on hand-crafted features for the discrimination of
phenological stages[47].
In another study, self-organizing
Kohonen maps (SOMs) were used for optical images segmentation
and subsequent restoration of missing data in a time-series of
satellite imagery.
Supervised classification with CNN was
performed. This method added a post-processing step that
included several filtering algorithms based on the available

38

July, 2018

Int J Agric & Biol Eng

information and geospatial analysis. An accuracy of 85% was
achieved for classification of major crops (wheat, maize, sunflower,
soybean, and sugar beet)[42]. However, there are challenges that
have slowed down the application of CNN for plant classification.
For example, each pixel of the space borne SAR (synthetic aperture
radar) imagery is characterized by backscatter phase and intensity
in multiple polarizations. Both data sources have multitemporal
nature and different spatial resolutions[47]. Information fusion is
thus important in the future to make DL more applicable in this
area.
Fruit counting is important for yield prediction and robotic
harvesting. The traditional manual counting or mobile camera
counting cannot provide satisfactory results and are
time-consuming.
Because of changes in occlusion and
illumination, pre-processing such images is challenging. Regular
DL methods have difficulty in solving these problems. A blob
detection method has proven to be useful[48], which was proposed
to accompany a fully convolutional network (FCN). The first step
of the method is to collect human-generated labels from a set of
fruit images. Then, a blob detection FCN was trained to perform
image segmentation. After that, a count convolutional network
was trained to take the segmented image and output an intermediate
estimate of the fruit count. The final step of the work was to train
a linear regression equation to map intermediate fruit count
estimates to final counts using human-generated labels as the
ground truth. This approach using DL with blob detection
improved not only the accuracy but also the efficiency of counting.
Land classification usually involves classification of large
areas of land and is important to such purposes as land use and land
cover (LULC), disaster risk assessment, agriculture, and food
security[49]. For classification and area estimation in the remote
sensing and other agriculture imagery, DL techniques has been
applied. The general idea of this DL approach is to fuse or
integrate data acquired by multiple heterogeneous sources by using
machine learning techniques and emerging big data and
geo-information technologies to provide data processing and
visualization capabilities. The methodology can be divided into
four steps: noise filtration and data clustering, classifying land
cover, map post-processing with filtering, and geospatial analysis.
In addition to satellites, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) are now
widely used to investigate various resources[50] based on deep CNN
(DCNN) and transfer learning (DTCLE). A feature extraction
method based on DCNN was used to extract cultivated land
information by introducing a transfer learning mechanism.
Finally, cultivated land information extraction results were
completed by the DTCLE and e-Cognition for cultivated land
information extraction (ECLE). The overall precision of DCTLE
and ECLE were both around 90%, but in terms of integrity and
continuity, DTCLE outperformed ECLE. This instance is an
extension of DL that can be applied in agriculture. The utilization
of UAVs permits acquisition of high-quality images.
Item detection is a fast-growing domain in DL.
In
agriculture fields, obstacle detection is also important for farmers,
especially when highly autonomous machines have been
increasingly used. In order to operate these machines safely
without supervision, they must perform automatic real-time risk
detection with high reliability[51]. An image classification method
with the AlexNet and DCNN were utilized to enhance
performances. The accuracy reached 99.9% in row crops and
90.8% in grass mowing, which is much better than traditional
ethods[52].

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

Vol. 11 No.4

Information from satellite is very precious and important for
making sustainable land use planning for minimizing CO2 emission,
maximizing economic returns, and minimizing land degradation.
The challenge with using information is to interpret the images
collected. Translating satellite images by using convolutional
neural networks (CNN) and genetic algorithms has become a useful
strategy for decision making, especially for precision agriculture
and agroindustry. The data can be used to classify plant types in a
land area using CNN. Land types and other data can be added to
the grid form. A grid form model was evaluated to assess
objectives and a genetic algorithm was used produce an optimal
solution[53]. Flower grading was also done by using a similar
concept[54].
CNN can also be used in weather forecasting[55], which is key
to agriculture. Crop yield prediction before harvest is crucial to
farmers, consumers, and the government in their efforts to design
strategies for selling, purchasing, market intervention, and food
shortage relief. CNN has also been used to predict yield in
agriculture[56]. It can be used for studying not only crops but also
animals. For example, CNN has been extensively used to classify
animal behaviors[57,58].
4.2 RNN applications in smart agriculture
RNN is very useful to process time series data and has been
used in many agricultural areas, such as land cover classification,
phenotype recognition, crop yield estimation, leaf area index
estimation, weather prediction, soil moisture estimation, animal
research, and event date estimation.
Land cover classification (LCC) is considered as a vital and
challenging task in agriculture, and the key point is to recognize
what class a typical piece of land is in. In the past, a lot of
applications are based on mono-temporal observations and ignoring
time-series effects in some problems. For instance, vegetation
changes its spatial appearance periodically, which can confuse the
mono-temporal approaches.
Meanwhile, mono-temporal
approaches might be influenced by some biases, like weather.
Therefore, deep sequence models have been applied, and a
widely-used variant RNN model is the LSTM. In an experiment
led by Ruwurm et al.[59], the LSTM network outperformed all
mono-temporal models (CNN and SVM) as well as the standard
RNN. Ienco et al.[60] combined the LSTM units with other
machine learning models (SVM, RF) and compared them with
mono-temporal approaches. They concluded that SVM with
LSTM units worked the best. In addition, RNN models are used
not only in recognition of land cover classes but also detection of
the changes of land. Lyu et al.[61] established a network called
REFEREE (learning a transferable change rule from RNN for
change detection), which consisted of two groups of picture input
(same region, different timestamp), several LSTM units, and a
graphical output showing regions experiencing changes. By
applying RNN models, REFEREE could learn a stable and rational
change rule, in both binary change cases and multi-class change
cases.
Plant phenotyping has become a hot topic, yet a challenging
one, because of the increasing need of precision agriculture.
Briefly, plant phenotyping means to recognize the kind of a plant
through its appearance or traits.
Most machine learning
approaches have relied on individual static observations, which
cause incorrect recognition of similar plants in typical periods. A
new deep learning structure for plant phenotype recognition was
created by Namin et al. [62], in which CNN was combined with
LSTM units. According to their structure, CNN was to extract

July, 2018

Zhu N Y, et al.

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities

features and its output was fed into an LSTM unit in order to build
a sequence model. Experiment results indicated that the sequence
model improved accuracy significantly, compared with a previous
pure CNN model, from 76.8% to 93%.
Beyond CNN, RNN has also been used for crop yield
estimation, which uses time series data to reduce biasing. Minh et
al.[63] trained two RNN-based classifiers, an LSTM network and a
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) network, and applied them in the task
of mapping winter vegetation quality coverage, along with
mono-temporal models. Their results indicated that the GRU
model outperformed all other models, with an accuracy of 99.05%
for a 5-fold cross validation dataset.
The leaf area index (LAI) is a key attribute of many
agricultural models. Accurate LAI and its dynamics are widely
used for estimations of environment, vegetation status and carbon
cycle etc. Traditional LAI estimation methods fall into two
categories, empirical methods and physical methods. The LAI
results may suffer from spatial or temporal discontinuities, which
limit their applications in climate simulation and weaken their
robustness. To solve the problem, an RNN-based model named
NARX (Nonlinear Autoregressive model process with eXogenous
input) was applied. The inputs of the NARX model were
previous prediction values and the current and previous values of
an exogenous input signal. The inputs were fed to an RNN and
the prediction Y were a part of inputs in the next time step. This
model took not only independent inputs into consideration but also
the output of the model in the past, making it more powerful and.
Chai et al.[64] established a model based on the NARX model called
NARXNN to estimate time-series LAI. They trained the model
on several datasets and made indirect and direct validation, both of
which suggested that NARXNN is a promising tool for time-series
LAI estimation. In application, Chen et al. [65] applied a NARX
model to predict the LAI of rubber.
RNN is useful for time series and thus has been used in
weather prediction. In Biswas et al.[66], three models were
compared for weather prediction: an RNN-based model named
NARXnet, a case-based reasoning model (CBR), and a segmented
CBR model. The input of NARXnet was the weather attributes of
a days before the target day and b predictions and targets. This
structure means that NARXnet could not only learn from historical
data but also from the previous predictions. The NARXnet got an
accuracy of 93.95%, outperforming the other two models
significantly. In addition, Zaytar et al.[67] established a new
LSTM model to predict 24 and 72 hours weather attributes of a city:
temperature, humidity, and wind speed. Compared with normal
RNNs, their structure consisted of an input layer, two stacked
LSTM layers connected with a dense layer, an activation layer and
a repeat layer. They used hourly attributes data of 15 years to
train the model and got competitive results compared with other
traditional methods. These suggest that deep RNN-based methods
are a competitive alternative for weather forecasting.
Soil moisture (SM) is a vital hydrological attribute for
precision agriculture, meteorology, and climate change. However,
SM in farmlands is a function of many factors and can vary
extremely with time and space, causing difficulty in precise
estimation. Neural networks are applied to this task naturally
because they can estimate complex functions and time-series input.
Lu et al.[68] tested a simplified NARX model whose input was only
the current features and the prediction it had given in the last time
step. They compared the predictions with the soil moisture data
given by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), the Land

Vol. 11 No.4

39

Surface Parameter Model (LPRM), and the Global Land Data
Assimilation System (GLDAS). The direct validation indicated
that their model remained stable and competitive in both frozen and
unfrozen seasons. In addition, Tzeng et al.[69] used a typical
NARX model to estimate the dynamics of soil moisture. They
used a NARX model (DLNN as they called) to predict soil
moisture on an hourly basis and compared the predictions with
ground measurements. The experiments showed that the model
was a promising tool for the task.
RNN has also been used in studying animals in both the
macroscopical and the microcosmic scales. With the development
of deep learning, RNN-based models have proven to be very
competitive. In South Africa, the movement of elephant herds
hurt the endangered species of vegetation. Palangpour et al.[70]
trained an RNN model combined with the particle swarm
optimization (PSO) algorithm to predict the locations of elephant
herds. The results indicated that the RNN model could provide
predictions with a low level of errors. In another research,
Demmers et al.[71] applied a first-order RNN for estimation of pig
growth. The result showed that the first-order RNN worked well
to predict pig growth.
RNN can also be used for event date estimation[72] and many
other purposes. As we have seen, sequence models have been
increasingly applied in agriculture, even though the main deep
learning methods used in agricultural tasks are still the CNN-based
models. If we look through the applications of sequence models,
it is not hard to conclude that where sequence models can play an
important role are usually tasks that involve a long time period or
require stability in the long term. The main mechanism of
improvements resulting from sequence models is to overcome bias
that occurs at typical time points or locations.
4.3 GAN applications in smart agriculture
GAN is a new kind of neural network but has been considered
a very useful method in many fields, especially in image processing.
GAN has often been used to enrich datasets. It has not been
applied to agriculture widely.
Ledig et al.[73] used GAN to solve feature loss caused by down
sampling. If a picture is compressed, some features can be lost or
become inaccurate and there is a need to recover photo-realistic
textures from it. To do that, they introduced a perceptual loss
function made up of an adversarial loss and a content loss.
Compared with widely-used pixel-wise MSE loss, the content loss
function they used was motivated by perceptual similarity. After
being trained with 350 K images, their model could recover highly
compressed images and outperformed some state-of-the-art models
at that time. This work is so fundamental that it can be used in
almost every project containing image processing, particularly in
agriculture fields where many applications are based on remote
sensing images.
In another study, Barth et al.[74] attempted to overcome the gap
between large quantity of data deep learning models require and the
shortage of manually annotated datasets. They used a GAN-based
model, called unsupervised cycle generative adversarial network, to
optimize the realism of synthetic agricultural images. In their
work, 10500 synthetic, 50 empirically annotated, and 225
unlabeled empirical images were used to train their model and they
hypothesized that the similarity between synthetic images and
empirical images can be improved qualitatively to improve the
translation of features. The results showed that the synthetic
images were translated well on local features such as color,
illumination scattering and texture while global feature translation

40

July, 2018

Int J Agric & Biol Eng

was not so good.
4.4 A Meta-Analysis of DL applications in smart agriculture
Many pure DL research articles are published in the ACM
proceedings. In contrast, applications of DL in agriculture are
more often published in research journals. Among the published
papers, the well-known databases of Science Citation Index (SCI)
and Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) collect the most
representative and qualified papers. Thus, a meta-data analysis
was performed using the bibliographic datasets, which contain the
metadata information, like journals, authors, publication year,
citations, and institutions. The metadata analysis, also called as
bibliometric analysis, belongs to the field of scientometrics. The
analysis has the advantages of data-driven characteristics, and
being objective, complete and repeatable[75].
The analysis involved the following steps: collecting datasets
from the bibliographic databases with explicit search strategies;
analysis of yearly output, topics, and related disciplines; and
displaying of an overall picture of DL-agriculture research.
The search strategy is as follows:
(TS=(deep learning) AND SU=agriculture) AND language:
(English) AND type: (Article)
Time span: 1985-2018 Index: SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI
where, TS stands for topic, SU stands for research area.
Forty-seven records were obtained by applying the search term
in the core collection of Web of Science database.
SU=agriculture was used to confine the research areas in the
field of agriculture. The analysis results were displayed as
follows.
Publication Yearly Output
The publication counts, to some degree, reveal the research
intensity in a field. The yearly output of publications is shown in
Figure 11. Also, the Total Local Citation Scores (TLCS) and
Total Global Citation Scores (TGCS) are shown in the figure.
The primary vertical axis is set for the Recs and TLCS, and the
secondary vertical axis is set for TGCS. TLCS stands for the
field recognition and TGCS stands for the recognition without field
constraint. These values are computed with the bibliometric
software, HistCite[76].

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

Vol. 11 No.4

decisions: problems, paradigms, and prospects[77] drew wide
attentions from all disciplines. This paper may be regarded as a
pioneering article advocating machine learning for agriculture
applications. As there are citation windows, the papers need time
to accrue citations. The papers in 2016 are impressive for having
acquired 44 global citations (TGCS=44). DL-agriculture papers
in 2016 discussed topics including plant identifications [78], and pest
detections[79], etc.
To have a close look at the research topics, the following
co-word analysis was conducted, which was based on the keyword
co-occurrence relations. The illustration was generated by the
bibliometric software, CiteSpace[80], as shown in Figure 12.

Figure 12 Co-word visualization for the research articles
In Figure 12, the node size is proportional to the keyword
frequencies. The different clusters are generated and tagged with
polygons. The topics for each cluster were generated with Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)[81], as shown by the red-colored words.
The first and the second cluster (cluster #0 and cluster #1) focus on
the topic of development policy. The third and fourth cluster
(cluster #2 and cluster #3) focus on recognition, using CNN and
structure similarity theory, respectively.
The revealed topics provide a landscape of the domain expert
knowledge at a micro level. How the subject of agriculture in a
macro-level is affected by the research fever is still not clear.
Journals can reveal the macro status of research trends to some
level. Relevant journals were investigated and the results are
listed in Table 3.
Table 3 Top ten high-impact journals that publish
DL-agriculture papers
Index

Figure 11 Publication yearly output (Recs stands for article
records, TLCS stands for the Total Local Citation Scores, TGCS
stands for the Total Global Citation Scores)
From the figure, it can be observed that the overall publication
trend is upward from the Recs counts. However, from the number
changes of the TLCS, one can tell that most of the TLCS are zeros,
meaning that DL-agriculture application articles are not citing each
other. This suggests that applications of DL in agriculture fields
are highly divergent and scattered in very different research
purposes. It also implies that more challenges and chances remain
in the research direction. A notable point in the TGCS is that in
2002, the paper Changing systems for supporting farmers'

Recs

TLCS

TGCS

1

Agricultural Systems

Journal

3

0

253

2

Biology and Fertility of Soils

1

0

36

3

Vadose Zone Journal

1

0

25

4

Agricultural Economics

1

0

24

5

Computers and Electronics in Agriculture

10

3

23

6

Agricultural Sciences in China

1

0

16

7

Biosystems Engineering

2

1

15

8

Canadian Journal of Soil Science

1

0

15

9

Agriculture and Human Values

1

0

13

10

Crop & Pasture Science

1

0

13

The journals are listed by the descending order of TGCS index,
higher ranking meaning higher all-discipline impacts.
The
number provides a direct and simple indicator for the journal
impacts on the DL-agriculture research. However, the distribution
on how the research combines different disciplines is still not clear.

July, 2018

Zhu N Y, et al.

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities

The following overlay visualization based on dual-mapping was
thus performed, as shown in Figure 13.
The dual-mapping consists of two mappings based on datasets
of large-scale journals from all disciplines. The whole science
mappings consist of the citing journal cluster on the left side and
the cited journal cluster on the right. The citing cluster contain
10 330 all-discipline journals and the cited cluster contain 10 253
all-discipline journals[82]. Each point in the figure stands for a

Vol. 11 No.4

41

journal and the large-scale network clustering method generated
these clusters, called Blondel clusters [83]. Thus, the citing
trajectories over different disciplines can be visually depicted on
this base map. One can tell that plant science, chemistry, and
economics are also the citation sources besides the computer
science discipline. This is in line with intuitive understanding.
More research energy may have the potential to link the above
mentioned disciplines in the near future.

Figure 13 Overlay visualization of DL-agriculture research on the whole science dual-mapping

5 Discussion
Most of the recent advances in agriculture fields made by
researchers are closely connected to production and every other
part of agriculture for the purposes of improving productivity of
crops, reducing and preparing for the plant diseases, boosting
mechanized and automated modern agriculture and agro-industry.
DL is usually used for image recognition or data classification,
which can be summarized to include four steps: data collection and
data preprocessing, neural network training, model testing, and
final result analysis.
For the first step, the combination of DL with other advanced
technologies, such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), radar, and
Internet of Things, can provide high quality datasets of images and
other forms. These data greatly enhance applications of DL in
agriculture and improve the accuracy of resulting tools[84]. For the

second step, new training algorithms and methods can enhance the
accuracy, especially for those applications that require high
precision. K-means feature learning, blob detection, FCNN,
AlexNet etc. play an increasingly important role. Model testing
with new data is always an important third step. In the final step,
the results are interpreted and analyzed.
Either from historical research statistics or the recent research
results, it can be shown that DL can be well applied in agriculture
to solve various problems that have concerned farmers and
scientists for a long time. With the help of novel techniques and
new theories, these new approaches outperform the previous
methods in many ways. Take image recognition for instance,
previously, scholars may collect images and use DL to do
classification by analyzing pixels in RGB images [85]. The result
of this method can be satisfactory under certain optimal conditions.
Because of illumination changes, displacement of targets by winds,

42

July, 2018

Int J Agric & Biol Eng

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

Vol. 11 No.4

camera jitter, zoom changes, unexpected changes in camera
parameters; inconsistent recognition and classification occur [41].
Therefore, color analysis can be unreliable since it usually relies on
the color distribution in an image and there are many conditions
where the temporal consistency of this feature is violated [36]. For
plant color application, methods based on vein and pattern
recognition have been proposed to reduce the uncertainty for
analysis of color in an image[86], because vein is also a robust and
significant feature of the plants and usually vein morphological
patterns are a good leaf fingerprint. The correlation between vein
characteristics and some properties of the leaf seldom change when
and after pre-processing the images.
Because there are many applications in agriculture not
equipped with recent new techniques, there is still a lot of room for
expanding DL in agriculture research. Although some of the
results gained accuracy around or higher than 95%, robustness and
reliability are still challenges. The promise of the application of
DL in agriculture can be foreseen. Moreover, it is very possible
that future development of DL in agriculture will be based on not
only a single theory or method but a combination of multiple
methods. The metadata analysis shows that applications of DL in
agriculture are upward from the Recs counts. However, they are
highly divergent and scattered in very different research purposes.
It implies that more challenges and opportunities remain in the area
and more efforts are needed.

(3) Smart agriculture machinery equipments. Agriculture
production involves numerous kinds of tasks. These tasks are
often labor consuming and the working environment is very
challenging. Using DP to mimic human behavior and driven
agriculture machinery equipments has prospective future in many
areas of agriculture, such as seeding, management, harvesting, and
post-harvest processing. For example, a robot that can be used to
harvest apples is very useful. It must be intelligent enough to
position apples and pick apples with a high efficiency. Under
natural condition, background light, tree branches and leaves have
strong interference to computer vision signal. The routes of robot
arms reach targets should also be optimized. For all these issues,
DP techniques may be very useful.
(4) Agricultural economic system management. Agriculture
yield itself is not enough for agriculture. There are many more
factors should be considered such as the prices and the quality of
agriculture products. It is very meaningful to predict agriculture
product prices. However, prices are related to many variables.
Under this case, DP can be used to model price changes with
different variables. There are complex relationships between
agriculture product quality and nutrition, human health, and
economy. DP can be used to model the complex relationship and
enhance agricultural economic system management.

6 Conclusions

This project is partially supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 31771680), Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities of China (No: JUSRP51730A),
the Modern Agriculture Funds of Jiangsu Province (No.
BE2015310), the Modern Agriculture Funds of Jiangsu Province
(Vegetable) (No. SXGC[2017]210), the New Agricultural
Engineering of Jiangsu Province (No. SXGC[2016]106), the 111
Project (B1208), and the Research Funds for New Faculty of
Jiangnan University.

In this summary, the concepts, tools, limitations, algorithms of
DL are summarized.
Applications of DL in agriculture are
reviewed. It can be observed that DL has been widely used in
different areas of agriculture, such as plant disease detection, plant
classification and weed identification, fruit counting, land
classification, obstacle detection, image translation, weather
forecasting, yield prediction, and animal behavior classification.
While DL research is gaining momentum in general, research of
DL for agriculture is very divergent according to the metadata
analysis. There are many opportunities for DL applications in
smart agriculture, such as:
(1) Agriculture information processing. Monitoring the status
of plants and animals is vital to agriculture production. Some
status variables of plants and animals cannot be measured directly.
Under this case, DP can be used to determine unmeasured
information from measured one because different variables of plant
status may have some dependent relationships. In agriculture
production, plants or animals interact with environmental factors.
It is difficult to build a pure mechanism-based-model structure to
describe the relationship between plants (or animals) and
environmental factors. As a data-driven-model structure, DP can
be directly used to build the relationship of plant (or animal) factors,
environmental factors and plant (or animal) growth status. This
will facilitate agriculture information processing.
(2) Agriculture production system optimal control. Control
strategies in agriculture production system often rely on farmer
experience or experts knowledge, which do not consider plant
(animal) physiological status or real time demand.
This
unavoidably makes the strategies not optimal. An advantage of
DP is to model complex systems without heavily relying on the
knowledge of mechanisms. By using DP to model agriculture
production systems, optimal control strategy development thus
becomes possible, which makes use real time measurement of plant
(animal) physiological status and historical data.

Acknowledgements

[References]
[1]

Schalkoff R J. Artificial Neural Networks. Vol. 1. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997.
[2] Schmidhuber J. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview.
Neural Networks, 2015; 61: 85117.
[3] Kamilaris A, Prenafeta-Bold F X. Deep learning in agriculture: A
survey. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2018; 147: 7090.
[4] Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition. Cornell University Library, Available at:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[5] Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Two-stream convolutional networks for
action recognition in videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2014; 1-4: 568576.
[6] Fan Y, Qian Y, Xie F, Soong F K. TTS synthesis with bidirectional
LSTM based recurrent neural networks. Proc. Interspeech, 2014;
pp.19641968.
[7] Alex G, Schmidhuber J.
Framewise phoneme classification with
bidirectional LSTM and other neural network architectures. Neural
Networks, 2005; 18(5-6): 602610.
[8] Alec R, Metz L, Chintala S. Unsupervised representation learning with
deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. Cornell University
Library, Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06434.
[9] Surez P L, Sappa A D, Vintimilla B X. Infrared image colorization
based on a triplet dcgan architecture. IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), 2017.
[10] Jin J Q, Fu K, Zhang C H. Traffic sign recognition with hinge loss
trained convolutional neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2014; 15(5): 19912000.
[11] Haykin S S. Neural Networks and Learning Machines. Pearson
Schweiz Ag, 2008.

July, 2018

Zhu N Y, et al.

Deep learning for smart agriculture: Concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities

[12] Alpaydin E. Neural Networks and Deep Learning, 2016; 224p.
[13] Hecht-Nielsen R C. Neural Networks for Perception. Academic Press,
Inc., 1992; pp.65-93. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12741252-8.50002-9
[14] Goh A T C. Back-propagation neural networks for modeling complex
systems. Artificial Intelligence in Engineering, 1995; 9(3): 143151.
[15] Li J C, Wei H G. BP neural network used in recognition algorithm for
star pattern. AOPC 2017: Optical Sensing and Imaging Technology and
Applications. Vol. 10462. International Society for Optics and Photonics,
2017.
[16] Xia X L, Han R Y. Research on classifications of mobile networking
device users based on BP neural networks. 2nd International Conference
on Mechatronics and Information Technology (ICMIT 2017), 2017;
pp.104109.
[17] Razavian A S, Azizpour H, Sullivan J, Carlsson S. CNN features
off-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition. IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), 2014.
[18] Vincent P, Larochelle H, Bengio Y, Manzagol P A. Extracting
andcomposing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In Proc. 25th
Int.Conf. on Machine Learning, 2008; pp.10961103.
[19] LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G.
Deep learning.
Nature, 2015;
521(7553): 436.
[20] Bouvrie J. Notes on convolutional neural networks. Cambridge: MIT,
2006.
[21] Yin W P, Kann K, Yu M, Schtze H. Comparative study of CNN and
RNN for natural language processing. Cornell University Library, 2017.
Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.01923.
[22] Parkhi O M, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A. Deep Face Recognition. BMVC,
2015; 1(3): 112.
[23] Chung J Y, Gulchre C, Cho K, Bengio Y. Gated feedback recurrent
neural networks. International Conference on Machine Learning. Lille,
France, 2015.
[24] Sak H, Senior A W. Processing acoustic sequences using long short-term
memory (LSTM) neural networks that include recurrent projection layers.
U.S. Patent No. 9,620,108. 11 Apr. 2017.
[25] Han S, Kang J L, Mao H Z, Hu Y M, Li X, Li Y B, et al. Ese: Efficient
speech recognition engine with sparse LSTM on FPGA. Proceedings of
the 2017 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable
Gate Arrays. ACM, 2017.
[26] Britz D, Goldie A, Luong M T, Le Q. Massive exploration of neural
machine translation architectures.
ACL, 2017. Available at:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.03906.pdf.
[27] Radford A, Metz L, Chintala S. Unsupervised representation learning
with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. ICLR, 2016.
Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06434.
[28] Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley D, Ozair S,
et al. Generative adversarial nets. Proceedings of Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2014.
[29] Schoner G, Kelso J A. Dynamic pattern generation in behavioral and
neural systems. Science, 1988; 239(4847): 15131520.
[30] Denton E L, Chintala S, Fergus R. Deep generative image models using
a laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. Proceedings of Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
[31] Ledig C, Theis L, Huszar F, Caballero J, Cunningham A, Acosta A, et al.
Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial
network.
In Proceeding of IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR 2017), Honolulu, 2017.
Available at:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04802.
[32] Tran L, Yin X, Liu X M. Disentangled representation learning gan for
pose-invariant face recognition. In Proceeding of IEEE Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2017), Honolulu, 2017. Available at:
http://cvlab.cse.msu.edu/pdfs/Tran_Yin_Liu_CVPR2017.pdf
[33] Rumelhart D E, Hinton G E, Williams R J. Learning representations by
back-propagating errors. Nature, 1986; 323(6088): 533-536.
[34] Lecun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P. Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998;
86(11): 22782324.
[35] Krizhevsky, Alex, Ilya Sutskever, Geoffrey E. Hinton.
Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Proceedings of
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.
[36] Mikolov T, Karafit M, Burget L, ernock J H, Khudanpur S.
Recurrent neural network based language model.
Eleventh Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,

Vol. 11 No.4

43

Chiba, Japan, 2010.
[37] Sundermeyer M, Schlter R, Ney H. LSTM neural networks for
language modeling. Thirteenth Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association, Portland, Oregon, USA, 2012.
[38] Abadi M, Barham P, Chen J M, Chen Z F, Davis A, Dean J, et al.
TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning. Proceedings of
the 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 16), Savannah, GA, USA, 2016.
[39] Rampasek L, Goldenberg A. Tensorflow: Biologys gateway to deep
learning? Cell Systems, 2016; 2(1): 1214.
[40] Jia Y Q, Shelhamer E, Donahue J, Karayev S, Long J, Girshick R, et al.
Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding.
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Multimedia.
2014. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1408.5093.pdf.
[41] Yalcin H, Razavi S. Plant classification using convolutional neural
networks.
Fifth International Conference on Agro-Geoinformatics
(Agro-Geoinformatics), IEEE, 2016.
[42] Sladojevic S, Arsenovic M, Anderla A, Culibrk D, Stefanovic D. Deep
neural networks based recognition of plant diseases by leaf image
classification.
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2016;
Article ID 3289801, 11p.
[43] Hanson A, Joel M G, Joy A, Francis J. Plant leaf disease detection using
deep learning and convolutional neural network. International Journal of
Engineering Science, 2017; 5324.
[44] Tang J L, Wang D, Zhang Z G, He L J, Xin J, Xu Y. Weed identification
based on K-means feature learning combined with convolutional neural
network. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2017; 135: 6370.
[45] Srbinovska M, Gavrovski C, Dimcev V, Krkoleva A, Borozan V.
Environmental parameters monitoring in precision agriculture using
wireless sensor networks, Journal of Cleaner Production, 2015; 88:
297307.
[46] Ge Z Y, McCool C, Sanderson C, Corke P. Content specific feature
learning for fine-grained plant classification. CLEF (Working Notes), 2015.
Available at: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1391/39-CR.pdf.
[47] Yalcin H.
Plant phenology recognition using deep learning: 6th
International Conference on Deep-Pheno. Agro-Geoinformatics, IEEE,
2017.
[48] Chen S W, Shivakumar S S, Dcunha S, Das J, Okon E, Qu C, et al.
Counting apples and oranges with deep learning: A data-driven approach.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2017; 2(2): 781788.
[49] Kussul N, Shelestov A, Lavrenyuk M, Butko I, Skakun S. Deep learning
approach for large scale land cover mapping based on remote sensing data
fusion. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), IEEE,
2016. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS.2016.7729043.
[50] Lu H, Fu X, Liu C, Li L G, He Y X, Li N W. Cultivated land
information extraction in UAV imagery based on deep convolutional
neural network and transfer learning. Journal of Mountain Science, 2017;
14(4): 731741.
[51] Christiansen P, Hansen M, Steen K, Karstoft H, Jrgensen R. Advanced
sensor platform for human detection and protection in autonomous farming.
In Precision Agriculture15; Wageningen Academic Publishers:
Wageningen, the Netherlands, 2015; pp.13301334.
[52] Steen K A, Christiansen P, Karstoft H, Jrgensen R N. Using deep
learning to challenge safety standard for highly autonomous machines in
agriculture. Journal of Imaging, 2016; 2(1): 6.
[53] Arkeman Y, Buono A, Hermadi I. Satellite image processing for
precision agriculture and agroindustry using convolutional neural network
and genetic algorithm. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science 54 (2017) 012102. doi: 10.1088/1755-1315/54/1/012102.
[54] Sun Y, Zhu L, Wang G, Zhao F. Multi-input convolutional neural
network for flower grading.
Journal of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, 2017; Article ID 9240407, 8p. https://doi.org/10.1155/
2017/9240407.
[55] Salman A G, Kanigoro B, Heryadi Y. Weather forecasting using deep
learning techniques. Advanced International Conference on Computer
Science and Information Systems (ICACSIS), IEEE, 2015.
[56] You J X, Li X C, Low M, Lobell D, Ermon S. Deep Gaussian process
for crop yield prediction based on remote sensing data. Proceedings of
the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17),
pp.45594665.
[57] Kasfi K T, Hellicar A, Rahman A. Convolutional neural network for
time series cattle behaviour classification. Proceedings of the Workshop
on Time Series Analytics and Applications. ACM, 2016.

44

July, 2018

Int J Agric & Biol Eng

[58] Rahman A, Smith D, Hills J, Bishop-Hurley G, Henry D, Rawnsley R. A
comparison of autoencoder and statistical features for cattle behaviour
classication. In IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence
(IEEE WCCI), 2016; pp.17.
[59] Ruwurm M, Krner M. Multi-temporal land cover classification with
long shortterm memory neural networks. ISPRS - International Archives
of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences,
Volume XLII-1/W1, 2017; pp.551558.
[60] Ienco D, Gaetano R, Dupaquier C, Maurel P. Land cover classification
via multi-temporal spatial data by recurrent Neural Networks IEEE
Geoscience & Remote Sensing Letters, 2017; 99: 15.
[61] Lyu H, Lu H, Mou L. Learning a transferable change rule from a
recurrent neural network for land cover change detection. Remote
Sensing, 2016; 8(6): 506.
[62] Namin S T, Esmaeilzadeh M, Najafi M, Brown T B, Borevitz J O. Deep
phenotyping: Deep learning for temporal phenotype/genotype
classification. bioRxiv, 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/134205.
[63] Minh D H T, Ienco D, Gaetano R, Lalande N, Ndikumana E. Deep
recurrent neural networks for winter vegetation quality mapping via
multitemporal SAR Sentinel-1. IEEE Geoscience & Remote Sensing
Letters, 2017; 99: 15.
[64] Chai L N, Qu Y H, Zhang L X, Liang S L, Wang J D. Estimating
time-series leaf area index based on recurrent nonlinear autoregressive
neural networks with exogenous inputs International Journal of Remote
Sensing, 2012; 33 (18): 57125731.
[65] Chen B Q, Wu Z X, Wang J K, Dong J W, Guan L M, Chen J M, et al.
Spatio-temporal prediction of leaf area index of rubber plantation using
HJ-1A/1B CCD images and recurrent neural network. ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2015; 102: 148160.
[66] Biswas S K, Sinha N, Purkayastha B, Marbaniang L. Weather prediction
by recurrent neural network dynamics.
International Journal of
Intelligent Engineering Informatics, 2014; 2(2-3): 166180.
[67] Zaytar M A, El Amrani C. Sequence to sequence weather forecasting
with long short-term memory recurrent neural networks. International
Journal of Computer Applications, 2016; 143(11): 711.
[68] Lu Z, Chai L N, Liu S M, Cui H Z, Zhang Y H, Jiang L M, et al.
Estimating time series soil moisture by applying recurrent nonlinear
autoregressive neural networks to passive microwave data over the Heihe
River Basin, China. Remote Sensing, 2017; 9(6): 574.
[69] Tzeng Y C, Fan K T, Lin C Y, Lee Y J, Chen K S. Estimation of soil
moisture dynamics using a recurrent dynamic learning neural network.
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2012; 88(8): 12511253.
[70] Palangpour P, Venayagamoorthy G K, Duffy K. Recurrent neural
network based predictions of elephant migration in a South African game
reserve. International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2006:
pp.40844088.
[71] Demmers T G M, Gauss S, Wathes C M, Cao Y, Parsons D J.
Simultaneous monitoring and control of pig growth and ammonia
emissions. IX International Livestock Environment Symposium, 2012;
C-1323.
[72] Wahlberg F, Wilkinson T, Brun A. Historical manuscript production date
estimation using deep convolutional neural networks. 15th International
Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), IEEE,

View publication stats

Open Access at https://www.ijabe.org

Vol. 11 No.4

2016.
[73] Ledig C, Theis L, Huszar F, Caballero J, Cunningham A, Acosta A, et al.
Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial
network. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 2017; pp.105114.
[74] Barth R, IJsselmuiden J M M, Hemming J, van Henten E J. Optimising
realism of synthetic agricultural images using cycle generative adversarial
networks. Proceedings of the IEEE IROS workshop on Agricultural
Robotics/Kounalakis, Tsampikos, van Evert, Frits, Ball, David Michael,
Kootstra, Gert, Nalpantidis, Lazaros, Wageningen: Wageningen University
& Research, 2017; pp.1822. http://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/
533105
[75] Hu K, Qi K, Guan Q, Wu C, Yu J, Qing Y, et al. A scientometric
visualization analysis for night-time light remote sensing research from
1991 to 2016. Remote Sensing, 2017; 9(8): 802. doi: 10.3390/
rs9080802.
[76] Garfield E. From the science of science to scientometrics visualizing the
history of science with HistCite software. Journal of Informetrics, 2009;
3(3): 173179.
[77] McCown R L. Changing systems for supporting farmers' decisions:
problems, paradigms, and prospects. Agricultural Systems, 2002; 74(1):
179220. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-521X(02)00026-4.
[78] Grinblat G L, Uzal L C, Larese M G, Granitto P M. Deep learning for
plant identification using vein morphological patterns. Computers and
Electronics
in
Agriculture,
2016;
127:
418424.
doi:
10.1016/j.compag.2016.07.003.
[79] Ding W, Taylor G. Automatic moth detection from trap images for pest
management. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2016; 123:
1728. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2016.02.003.
[80] Chen C. CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing emerging trends and
transient patterns in scientific literature. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 2006; 57(3): 35977.
[81] Blei D M, Ng A Y, Jordan M I. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 2003; 3(1): 9931022.
[82] Chen C, Leydesdorff L. Patterns of connections and movements in
dual-map overlays: A new method of publication portfolio analysis.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 2013;
65(2): 33451. doi: 10.1002/asi.22968.
[83] Blondel V D, Guillaume J-L, Lambiotte R, Lefebvre E. Fast unfolding of
communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
And Experiment, 2008; 2008(10): P10008. doi: 10.1088/1742-5468/
2008/10/P10008.
[84] Gwan J, Moon H H, Tae J, Syed K, Hassan I, Dang M, et al. Deep
convolutional neural network for classifying Fusarium wilt of radish from
unmanned aerial vehicles. Journal of Applied Remote Sensing, 2017;
11(4). doi: 10.1117/1.JRS.11.042621.
[85] Dyrmann M, Midtiby H S, Mortensen A K. Pixel-wise classification of
weeds and crops in images by using a fully convolutional neural network.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Agricultural Engineering,
Aarhus, Denmark, 2016.
[86] Grinblat G L, Uzal L C, Larese M G, Granitto P M. Deep learning for
plant identification using vein morphologicalpatterns. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 2016; 127: 418424.

