See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327842873

The left behind: Smallholders in contemporary Russian agriculture
Article in Journal of Agrarian Change  October 2018
DOI: 10.1111/joac.12279

CITATIONS

READS

34

348

1 author:
Stephen K. Wegren
Southern Methodist University
160 PUBLICATIONS 1,866 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

The State and Food Security in Contemporary Russia View project

The Insecurity of Food Security in Russia's Far North View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Stephen K. Wegren on 21 April 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Received: 26 September 2017

Revised: 24 April 2018

Accepted: 1 May 2018

DOI: 10.1111/joac.12279

SYMPOSIUM ARTICLE

The left behind: Smallholders in contemporary
Russian agriculture
Stephen K. Wegren
Political Science, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, TX, USA

Abstract

Correspondence
Stephen K. Wegren, Political Science,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX,
USA.
Email: swegren@smu.edu

Smallholder production in Russia has been in decline for

Funding information
Norwegian Research Council

production remains traditional and subsistence oriented.

more than a decade. The likelihood is for continued marginalization. Smallholders confront four obstacles. First, path
dependencies, which includes the fact that smallholders'
Second, institutions in the form of state policy restrict land
and animals. Third, Russia's role in the third food regime
means that smallholders are unable to help Russia's emergence as a global food superpower. Fourth, smallholders
are being left behind in the ongoing technological revolution
led by agroholdings. As technological advancement expands
in scope, the gap between large farms and smallholders will
widen.
KEYWORDS

household plots, postcommunist agriculture, Russia, smallholders,
technological transformation

1

|

I N T RO DU CT I O N

Global agriculture is undergoing tremendous change driven by socioeconomic and technological change brought
about by globalization. On the one hand, smallholder agriculture produces more than 80% of the world's food on just
12% of agricultural land, but most smallholders remain petty commodity producers whose main goal is subsistence
and whose activity involves the commodification of subsistence (Bernstein, 2010). On the other hand, we have
witnessed the rise of global agribusiness and capital intensive companies that are vertically integrated and export oriented. These companies dominate the global food regime, discussed in more detail below. Despite high levels of food
production, smallholders often face significant disadvantages. Shared obstacles across countries include lack of
access to credit, isolation from domestic and foreign markets, and nonintegration into supply chains. How smallholders fare in this bimodal model of global agricultural between big and small capital remains a subject of academic
debate (Birner & Resnick, 2010; Durr, 2016; Goldsmith, 1985).
This paper focuses on smallholders in Russia, who coexist in an agricultural system with giant agribusiness. We
follow the European Union, Food and Agriculture Organization, and the World Bank in their definition of smallholders

J Agrar Change. 2018;18:913925.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/joac

 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

913

914

WEGREN

as family agricultural operations on less than 2 ha of land. Our analysis of smallholders in Russia focuses on household
plots or lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo (literally translated as personal subsidiary farming) as the representative of
smallholders because this activity is the most economically significant among the different types of smallholder production.1 Russian smallholders (lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo) are defined not just by the size of land holdings, they
also constitute a legal category of producer that is noncommercial, and therefore, production is not taxed. The article
addresses three specific questions. (a) What is the role and place of smallholders in Russia's postcommunist agricultural and food systems? (b) What factors impact the role and place of smallholders in Russia's agricultural system? and
(c) What are future prospects for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo?
In addressing these questions, the paper analyses two sets of obstacles. The first set includes path dependencies;
the institutional arrangementstate priorities, policies, and goalswhich defines the contribution that smallholders
are able to make and their place in the agricultural system; and Russia's role in the global food regime. These factors
are generally known to analysts and have been discussed to varying degrees. The second set of obstacles has yet to
appear in the literature: Smallholders are being left behind during Russia's technological revolution in agriculture.
Smallholders in Russia not only have to overcome the problem of inadequate capital to obtain hightech equipment,
there is little prospect for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo to close the technology gap with agroholdings, and smallholders are unable to use most advanced technologies and production techniques on their small plots of land.
The core argument is that smallholders are not just falling behind, they are being left behind. The falling behind
refers to deficiencies and traditional obstaclesland, labour, and capital. The falling behind argument is based on
smallholders' declining agricultural output since 2004 in volume of production and as a percentage of total output,
although this decline is not the only evidence. Falling behind is evidenced as well by divergence in land holdings,
revenue streams, and access to labour compared with large farms. The left behind hypothesis refers to the
technological gap in agricultural production that smallholders have little chance of closing now or in the future.
Smallholders' are unable to adapt to or participate in the technological revolution that is occurring in Russian
agriculture. The decline of smallholders in Russia is similar to that in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) after 2005
as analysed in this symposium (Burkitbayeva & Swinnen, 2018). The decline in CEE nations is somewhat surprising
given that many former communist nations joined the European Union in the big bang of 2004 and became eligible
for European Union subsidies and improved access to markets. Smallholders in Russia, however, stand in stark
contrast to Central Asian states, where smallholder access to land and food production has increased (Lerman &
Sedik, 2018). Their paper in this symposium argues that Central Asia is a success in terms of individualization of land
and smallholder production.
Prospects for the majority of Russian smallholders are more challenging now than at any time in the post
communist period. Smallholders no longer face a semihostile state as during the Soviet period, but smallholders
are steadily losing economic importance. Moreover, the likelihood of reversing economic decline and increasing economic influence is poor because smallholders lack political power. The paper by Falkowski in this symposium shows
that political influence and economic power are intrinsically linked (Falkowski, 2018). Low political influence equates
to low economic power and access to resources. That said, it is unlikely that smallholder production will disappear in
the next 1520 years as predicted by the Russian Ministry of Agriculture, citing longterm decline in household animal husbandry and milk production (V Minsel'khoze, 2017). There clearly is a possibility that lichnoe podsobnoe
khoziaistvo will become mainly a recreational activity, and there is movement towards this outcome already, spurred
by incomes of agricultural workers that are rising and highpaying nonagricultural jobs being created in the food
chain; both occurrences dampen motivations to operate subsidiary agriculture (V APK, 2017). The irony is that lichnoe
podsobnoe khoziaistvo survived decades of state discrimination during the Soviet period but is now entering its most
precarious stage in the capitalist economy.
1

In the postSoviet period, lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo is referred to as household gardens, hobby gardens, or household farms,
although the term farm belies their true nature because of their small size. In 2016, there were 17.5 million registered lichnoe
podsobnoe khoziaistvo operations, of which 13.8 million were engaged in agricultural production. Less than 1% of households used
agricultural production as their main source of income (Rosstat, 2017b).

WEGREN

2

|

915

R U S S I A 'S S M A L LH O L D E R S

There are many types of agricultural producers in Russia today, including agroholdings, large farm enterprises,
medium farm enterprises, small farm enterprises, micro farms, private farmers of both large and small size, individual
entrepreneurs, and various forms of smallholder production, all of which are noncommercial operations. One type
of smallscale production is sadovodstvo, for which the main activity is growing of fruitapples, pears, plums,
cherriesalthough some vegetables may be grown too. Another type is ogorodnichestvo, where vegetable growing
is the only production, most commonly cucumber, tomatoes, carrots, green onion, garlic, and squash. Dacha plots
are a third form of smallholder production, which are weekend and seasonal homes for urban dwellers who want
to escape the city and recreate. Each of these forms of smallholding usually operate on less than 0.5 ha. Further,
the Russian Government includes private farmers as form of small farming, but there are significant differences.
By definition, private farms are commercial enterprises, although a significant percentage of private farmers have
land holdings that are closer to smallholders than large farm enterprises. The 2006 agricultural census, for example,
found that 37% of private farms had less than 10 ha of land, whereas only 3.6% had more than 500 ha. Another
17% of private farms had no land whatsoever, instead engaging in rural services and as financial middlemen (Rosstat,
2008, pp. 162163).
The most economically significant form of smallholding is in the form of lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo, which
existed in the preSoviet and Soviet periods, although admittedly the economic environment differed (Danilov,
1988).2 Sovietera smallholders were limited in land usage and number of animals permitted and faced both formal
and informal biases (Kalugina, 1991; Pallot & Nefedova, 2007; Wadekin, 1973). In the Soviet period, both urban
and rural dwellers were given use rights for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo, although the size of the land plot was
generally limited to no more than 0.5 ha, depending on the occupation of the head of household (Wegren, 2009).
State policy towards lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo varied over time. Ideologically anathema during the Soviet
period, lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo was seen as a vestige of petty capitalism. Yet even Stalin's policy was
schizophrenic, on the one hand driving peasant households into collective farms and nationalizing land but on the
other allowing collective farmers (and others) to use plots of land to grow food outside of the state plan. He also
permitted urban farm markets to exist where smallholders could sell their production at unregulated prices (Volin,
1971, 244248). Khrushchev first supported then discriminated against lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo by introducing
taxes and limits on animal holdings. Brezhnev tried to make household plots irrelevant by monetizing collective
farmers' wages and by raising farm wages to replace income from lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo. When the socialist
sector encountered production shortfalls in the late 1970s and early 1980s, Brezhnev loosened restrictions and tried
to boost household production by allowing closer integration between the private and public spheres of production
and marketing (OECD, 1991, p. 42). In 19871988, Gorbachev made lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo an integral
component of socialist agriculture and removed limits on the number of animals (Wegren, 1998, p. 44).
In the postSoviet period, lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo is legally a noncommercial form of agricultural production. Smallholders who engage in lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo may be divided into three categories, generally following Lenin's division of rich, middle, and poor households, each defined by its level of commercialization. The first
group obtains nearly all its income from food sales. This first group consists of a very small percentage of operators
(<1%), and it is they who are most affected by restrictions on land and capital, as well as poor access to credit. A
second group sells some of its production to supplement the household budget, but such income consists of less than
50% of total income. The third group consists of households that consume all or almost all of their food production.
Households in category three usually are located at the lower end of the income scale and need food production to
2
In the postStalin period, household gardeners used less than 2% of agricultural land but produced an estimated 2025% of the ruble
value of food production. Typically, household production consisted of potatoes, carrots, cucumbers, and small fruits and berries for
consumption. Sovietera rural households may have kept a cow for milk, sheep or goats, a pig or two, and chickens, so meat production was also significant (Kalugina, 1991, 167168). Over time, the desire by smallholders to raise large animals declined, depending
on how much assistance a household could obtain from a nearby large farm (Goskomstat SSSR, 1989).

916

WEGREN

survive. These subsistenceoriented households are the least affected by limitations on land and capital and do not
need access to credit (Uzun & Saraikin, 2012, pp. 4246).
The turbulence of the postSoviet economy in the 1990s witnessed a significant increase in production from
lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo. As the economy moved from nonmarket to marketbased after 1992, new opportunities were opened for smallholders in terms of the acquisition of land and capital, which led to a significant increase in
household food production (Pallot & Nefedova, 2007). Output from smallholders accounted for more than onehalf
of the ruble value of food production, reaching a high of 57% in 1997 after production from large farms had fallen for
several years. As late as 2004, household gardens accounted for more than onehalf of the ruble value of food
production (Pallot & Nefedova, 2007, p. 18).
Since 2004, however, household production has declined in volume and as a percentage of national output. In
2016, lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo accounted for less than 35% of the ruble value of food production (Rosstat,
2017a, p. 245). Russian smallholders have a higher percentage of food output compared with other European
postcommunist states, but most household production is selfconsumed (Nefedova & Pellot, 2006). Russia is a large
country with regional exceptions, but the contribution of household food production to regional food supply is generally lower in the agriculturally rich south. The level of food sales has been shown to rise as the income scale is
ascended (Wegren, 2014). For most households, however, the overwhelming volume of household food production
is selfconsumed.

3

ANALYSIS OF SMALLHOLDERS

|

How are we to understand the role of smallholders in Russia today? A political economy approach is used to analyse
smallholders' place in the food system in postSoviet Russia. This section analyses three factors: path dependency,
institutions, and the global food regime. A fourth factor, the technological revolution in agriculture, is treated in a separate section.

3.1

|

Path dependencies

Path dependencies are selfreinforcing mechanisms that reproduce characteristics and behaviours that hinder
economic change (North, 1990). Contemporary smallholders are directly affected by discernible path dependencies
from the Soviet period. Shared characteristics include smallholders use sustainable agricultural practices; most land
holdings are very small; labour is manual; the majority of food production is not commercial sale; and the family is
the basic unit of labour. As during the Soviet period, smallholders work only parttime on lichnoe podsobnoe
khoziaistvo. Men aged 4554 spend about an hour during their nonworking day, whereas men aged 55 and over
average 40 min on their free day (Rosstat, 2010). Another path dependency is the idea that lichnoe podsobnoe
khoziaistvo is foremost a form of subsidiary agricultural production. This seemingly trivial point in fact has enormous
importance because it indicates that other producers in the agricultural system have priority and are more important
for national food security.
There are also path dependencies in terms of disadvantages. Russia's smallholders often have difficulty utilizing
markets either because they lack transportation or do not have the labour to allocate for transportation to a market,
manning the stall, and returning from the market, similar to the situation in CEE nations. Smallholders lack
connections to food processors, and frequently, smallholder production fails to meet quality or sanitary standards,
again similar to CEE countries (Burkitbayeva & Swinnen, 2018). Smallholder production is poorly connected to retail
food chains and supermarkets, as well as supply chains, all of which have enormous transformative influence on
production and integration (Dries, Reardon, & Swinnen, 2004; Reardon, Barrett, Berdegue, & Swinnen, 2009;
Reardon, Timmer, & Berdegue, 2008). These disadvantages impact commercialized smallholders, whereas households
that consume all or most of their production are less affected.

917

WEGREN

Another inherited disadvantage concerns land. Russia's smallholders are numerically dominant but in aggregate
use a small amount of agricultural land. In 1990, operators of lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo used 3.2 million ha of agricultural land, equal to 1.4% of all agricultural land, with an average area of 0.2 ha. During the 1990s, the area of land
expanded for several years as both rural and urban dwellers sought to ensure their food security during economic
collapse (Kalugina, 2000). By the end of 1999, the area of land used for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo totaled 6.1 million ha, or about 2% of agricultural land, with an average size of 0.4 ha per garden. The 2006 agricultural census
found the area of agricultural land used for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo totalled 8.1 million ha, equal to about 4%
of agricultural land, with an average size of 0.4 ha per garden. But of the 8.1 million ha, only 2.5 million ha were arable
(Rosstat, 2008, p. 42).3 Even with an expansion in land used for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo, operators find it difficult to compete with agroholdings. In 2017, for example, the top five agroholdings controlled hundreds of thousands
of hectares each.
Despite discernible path dependencies, contemporary lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo is not merely a replication of
Sovietera smallholders. There are also discernible discontinuities. First, in the Soviet period, lichnoe podsobnoe
khoziaistvo was at various times supported formally by state policy and more regularly by informal ties to state and
collective farms that provided inputs and services to household gardeners who also were farm employees (Wadekin,
1973). Today, large farms and commercialized smallholders are competitors, so farm support is at a lower level and
subject to many variables.
A second discontinuity is the high degree of stratification between adapters and nonadapters among contemporary operators of lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo. Whereas most operators of lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo have small
plots of land that usually surround the dwelling, there is also a possibility to lease additional land away from the
dwelling, although only a small percentage actually do sothose that do have significantly higher income (Wegren,
2014). Further, a small percentage of lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo operators are adopting new practices that
increase labour productivity. Some smallholders have attempted to form informal networks and to build through
social capital through cooperation, although the process is fraught with difficulties (Golovina & Nilsson, 2011). Finally,
specialization is occurring in some regions that allows lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo operators to carve out a market
niche by producing sustainable food and marketing environmentally pure products.

3.2

|

Institutions

North defines institutions as formal rules, informal constraints, and their enforcement characteristics (North, 2005,
p. 63). He argues that institutions are central in shaping behaviour. Institutions matter because they are humanly
devised constraints that structure human interaction (North, 1990, p. 3). Institutions define the environment in
which people behave and the rules of the game that they follow (or not). The direct measurement of institutional
impact is often difficult, however, because the link between national level institutional change and microlevel
behaviour is fraught with complications. That said, institutional arrangements in Russia's agricultural sector impact
smallholder production by defining legal parameters. The size of smallholder land plots, for example, is regulated
by regional land laws. There are regional variations, but the national average of a household garden is less than
1 ha, which places inherent limitations on production potential. Size limitations are important for households that
derive a significant portion of their total income from food sales.
A second institutional impact concerns a limitation on animals. The household animal husbandry sector has been
in decline for more than a decade. Currently, due to health and sanitation concerns over swine and bird flu, a growing
number of regions have introduced numerical restrictions. Households are blamed for spreading of the swine flu virus
by transporting pork meat from quarantined zones to neighbouring villages and selling the meat (Mudrats, 2017). The
Ministry of Agriculture supports regional limits on pigs raised by lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo (Kvedomosti.ru, 2016).
3

Regional differences were significanttwo southern federal districts accounted for 56% of all land used for household gardening.
The northwest district, where land quality is poorer, had only 5% of agricultural land used for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo.

918

WEGREN

In spring 2017, the State Duma, the lower house of the Parliament, began to consider a bill that would establish
national norms, requiring households to have a certain number of square metres per pig (Diatlovskaia, 2017). Numerical restrictions obviously impact production potential and make it difficult to compete with large farms for market
share. Operators of lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo who are fully or partially commercialized are affected by this second
institutional restraint.
A third impact directly infringes upon smallholders' market share for vegetables. Smallholders produce a high percentage of the nation's vegetables, especially tomatoes. To reduce food imports, the federal government has supported the construction of technologically advanced greenhousesindustrial greenhouses that are based on
automation and robotics. An ambitious effort to expand largescale greenhouse construction and production is
underway, especially in southern regions where tomato growing by households is popular (Kakushkin, 2017). The volume of production from industrial greenhouses increased about 25% during 20132016. Domestic investors and foreign investors are rushing to this sector, which has produced profitability rates above 20% in recent years
(Maksimova & Ganenko, 2018). The number of greenhouse complexes and total land area used for greenhouse production is steadily growing. Greenhouse production of vegetables increased from 584 thousand tons in 2012 to 984
thousand tons in 2017 and is projected to rise to 1.15 million tons in 2018 (Diatlovskaia, 2018). The increase in industrial greenhouse production squeezes out all three categories of smallholders who try to market their vegetables at
urban markets.

3.3

|

Global food regime

The third food regime is characterized by a concentration of capital, the production of food surplus, the rise of commodity chains, and control of international food markets by corporate hegemons since 1980 (McMichael, 2013). This
corporate food regime is based on industrialized agricultural production, dependent upon the application of chemicals
and pesticides, irrigation, and largescale mechanization. In terms of global food trade, the corporate food regime is
dominated by food hegemons that dominate global food markets. Large global agrifirms control vertical and horizontal chains of production and distribution (Friedmann, 1988). Developed nations erect trade barriers to protect their
domestic markets while simultaneously using export subsidies to sell food to developing nations. Developing nations,
in turn, become importdependent and reorganize their agricultural sectors based upon cheaper food imports, which
in turn drives domestic smallholders into destitution.
During the communist period, Russia's agricultural sector was shielded from globalization, and food producers
were protected from international competition. True, the Soviet Union entered the global food market to purchase
grain and other agricultural commodities (OECD, 1991, pp. 181198). But most food trade entailed intrabloc trade
visvis other communist nations and autarky visvis the noncommunist West. Since 1992, however, Russia's
economy has been liberalized and integrated into global markets, highlighted by entry into the World Trade Organization in 2012. Russia is now integrated into the third food regime as a food importer and exporter.4
Russia's entry into the global food regime is marked by three occurrences. First, Russia's integration into the
global food regime is possible because of the emergence of agroholdings. Specifically, a relatively small group of agribusiness companies called agroholdings began to emerge in the early 2000s and now have enormous resources
(Epshtein, Hahlbrock, & Wandel, 2013; Rylko, Khramova, Uzun, & Jolly, 2008; Wegren, Nikulin, & Trotsuk, 2018).
Agroholdings are megasized, corporate farms. These farms are remarkable not only for their sizethey are much
bigger than traditional Sovietera state and collective farmsbut also for new types of management, new
technologies, the commercial orientation of the business and their aggressive market behaviour (Serova, 2007,
p. 19). Russian academician Petrikov contends that 23% of farms in Russia account for 93% of all profits (Petrikov,
4

We acknowledge the debate whether a new food regime has emerged based on food sovereignty. Space constraints prevent an
extended discussion, but this author's position on food sovereignty is closer to Bernstein (2014) and Agarwal (2014) than to Van
der Ploeg (2008) and McMichael (2013). With regard to its application to Russia, I completely disagree with Visser, Mamonova, Spoor,
and Nikulin (2015) that food sovereignty is a relevant concept for Russia's agricultural system.

WEGREN

919

2016). Russia's approximately 700 agroholdings represent an extreme concentration of economic power, and thus, to
understand Russia's agricultural system and the place of smallholders, it is necessary to include agroholdings in the
equation.5 The concentration of land and capital in the agricultural sector mirrors processes in other sectors of the
Russian economy such as energy, banking, and finance.
Agroholdings' concentration of power is seen by the fact that the five largest agroholdings controlled 3.2 million
ha of agricultural land in Russia in 2016: Prodimeks + Agrokul'tura790,000 ha; Rusagro670,000 ha; Miratorg
644,000 ha; Agrokompleks im. N. Tkacheva640,000 ha; and Ak Bars505,000 ha (Top10 latifundistov, 2017).
The concentration of land and other resources leads to concentration of production. The top 15 companies export
75% of Russian grain (Pavenskii, 2017). The top 20 companies produce 60% of the nation's pork (Kulistikova,
2017b). The top 20 companies produce 49% of animal feed (Kulistikova, 2017a). The top 25 companies produce
43% of the nation's meat (Kulistikova, 2017d).
Russia's large, powerful, corporate entities obtain financial investment from abroad and domestically. During
20122016, more than $3 billion of foreign investment was made in Russian agriculture (Ganenko, 2017). Minister
of Agriculture Alexander Tkachev indicated that during the same period, more than R1 trillion was invested by
domestic investors in agriculture. These investments were made into and by agroholdings, resulting in a stratum of
farms possessing modern, mechanized production equipment and the newest technologies. Agroholdings have political connections to regional and federal officials and benefit from by receiving the largest portion of state investment
and subsidies. The federal government is committed to strengthening agroholdings because they enhance Russia's
international status and prestige in the global food regime.
The second occurrence is marked by explicit statements that Russia is striving to be a global food superpower.
Statements by policymakers to this effect began to appear as early as 2009 following what was then a record harvest
in 2008. Former President Dmitry Medvedev expressed Russia's ambition to become a global food supplier (O razvitii,
2009). As prime minister, Medvedev boasted that Russia has the ability to feed half the world (My sposobny, 2013).
In October 2017, Minister Tkachev asserted we may become a leading agrarian power, referring to Russia's grain
exports, its growing meat exports, and its quest to become a leading exporter of organic food (Kniazeva, 2017,
p. 3). Grain is already an important commodity for export from Russia. In the 2015/2016 agricultural year, Russia
was the number one wheat exporter in the world, surpassing the Unites States, Canada, and Australia. In the
2016/2017 agricultural year, Russia exported over 35 million tons of grain, a record volume for that country. During
the 2017/2018 agricultural year, Russia regained the number one position with grain exports exceeding 50 million
tons, including about 37 million tons of wheat. Going forward, Minister Tkachev has indicated goals for Russia to produce 140150 million tons of grain and to export up to 50 million tons on a consistent basis (Agrofakt, 2016b).
Because of their limited land holdings, smallholders produce less than 1% of Russia's grain, thus making virtually
no contribution to grain supply.
To support their superpower aspirations, in November 2016, a federal programme called The Export of Products
of the Agroindustrial Complex was approved by the upper house in the Parliament, and in December 2016, the government officially brought the programme into effect (Rossii, 2016). For 2017, the programme received R846 million
rubles, with funding rising to R2.5 billion by 2020 (Kvedomosti.ru, 2017c). In July 2017, an analytical centre was
opened to promote Russian food and food brands in foreign markets, providing logistical, legal, and consultative assistance to food exporting companies. The programme established a target for food exports to reach $30 billion by
2021 (Kunle, 2017). Minister Tkachev indicated an ambition to increase food exports to $50 billion by 2024, up from
$20 billion in 2017 (Kvedomosti.ru, 2018a). These measures are intended for commercial producers who export their
surplus. Smallholders who consume their production do not participate in food exports.
The third occurrence has been the longterm absence of integration of smallholders into external markets.
Russian analysts express the necessity of integrating smallholders into the international agricultural system and

5

In 2014, there were 319 nonstate agroholdings, of which only one was foreign owned, and 463 state agroholdings, of which 382
were owned by municipal governments and only nine by the federal government (Uzun & Shagaida, 2015, p. 175).

920

WEGREN

specifically to export markets with members of the Eurasian Economic UnionRussia's version of the European
Union that includes a single market and free trade for many products (Tul'chev, Lukin, & Lukin, 2017).6 The reality
for smallholders, however, is isolation from foreign markets. In this regard, Russia's smallholders are similar to smallholders in CEE and more broadly throughout the developing world (Fan, Brzeska, & Olofinbiyi, 2015; Burkitbayeva &
Swinnen, 2018). There are steps that can be taken to integrate Russia's smallholders to the larger agricultural system
and perhaps even to the global food regime (Koester, 2005). Regime preference, however, is clearly oriented towards
supporting agroholdings.

4

|

T HE TE C H N O L O G Y R E V O L U T I O N I N A G R I C U LT U R E

Smallholders are left behind by technological advances that are being introduced by agroholdings and other large
farms. During the Soviet period, there was a mechanization gap between state and collective farms and lichnoe
podsobnoe khoziaistvo: the former utilizing mechanized machinery in many phases of production and the latter based
on manual labour. During the 1990s, large farms in Russia demechanized during the economic collapse, and as a consequence, the mechanization gap narrowed. Starting in the 2000s, however, with the appearance of agroholdings, a
technology gap has emerged. It is on the back of agroholdings and other large farms that Russian agriculture has
experienced, in the words of former Minister of Agriculture V. Semenov, a renaissance (Kvedomosti.ru, 2017b).
Agroholdings already hold enormous advantages in land, labour, and capital. Agroholdings receive the most state
financial support. Agroholdings facilitate the export food and give Russia prestige, and for that reason, they are
the preferred producer in the system. The acquisition and use of technological advances give agroholdings an even
greater advantage in the capture of domestic and foreign markets.
The technological revolution in Russia mirrors a similar revolution occurring in global agriculture. Globally, new
technologies are emerging in sensors and automation, as well as other directions (Zappa, 2014). On large farms, satellite sensors and drones can spot areas where pests or other problems exist, allowing farmers precise chemical application or pest removal, thereby reducing overall application of herbicides and pesticides (King, 2017). Variable swath
control reduces inputs by calculating relative productivity in a field and applies seed, minerals, or fertilizers at variable
rates accordingly. Agricultural robots substitute for manual labour and not only save money but are more efficient in
harvesting, fruit picking, weeding, planting, and ploughing. Efforts are being made in developing nations to connect
smallholders to technological innovations in agriculture (World Bank, 2017).
Currently, Russia's agricultural producers trail the West in the use of advanced technologies, but Russian
policymakers and investors are committed to making the sector modern and globally competitive. Deputy Minister
of Agriculture I. Kuzin noted that Russia's agricultural sector has turned into a hightech branch of the economy.
Robotization and automation show that Russian agriculture has moved to a qualitatively new level of development
(Presssluzhba, 2017). Kuzin's position is a bit optimistic as it is still early in Russia's technological revolutionan estimated 10% of Russia's 12,000+ large farms use advanced technology (Maksimova, 2017). But the prospects are considered to be bright. The Ministry of Agriculture estimates that by 2019, 30% of farms will be using the internet of
things. During 20122016, more than $685 million was invested in artificial intelligence and robotics in Russian agriculture, attracting an additional $800 million in private investment (Forbes.ru, 2017).
As foreign and domestic investment flows into new technology, the gap between large corporate farms and
smallholders continues to widen. A pilot project using robotics in cheese production was constructed in Moscow
Oblast in 2017 and began production in mid2018, producing 100 tons a day (Regnum, 2017). Experimental robots
are also being used to pick apples at a rate of one apple per second and are able to move from orchard to orchard
independently (Agrofakt, 2016a). In the next few years, there will be more drones used in agriculture than in any
6
The Eurasian Economic Union was formed in 2010 with the creation of a customs union and single economic space. The formal
union came into being in January 2015 with founding members Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus. Subsequently, Armenia and
Kyrgyzstan joined in 2015, bringing membership to five states as of 2018.

WEGREN

921

other sector. Laser sensors are being introduced to calculate how much fertilizer or pesticide a given area of land
needs so as to prevent overapplication (Kvedomosti.ru, 2017a). In 2017, the Urals State Agricultural University
announced the creation of a pilotless tractor that will operate with artificial intelligence and be ready for use in
agriculture within 3 years (Interfax, 2017). In August 2017, in Rostov Oblast, the first pilotless grain combine
entered into operation. The director of an agricultural machine making company in Rostov, Dmitry Inozemtsev,
noted that the use of artificial intelligence and robotics is developing in many directions in agriculture, for example,
controlling the speed and course of combines (V Rostove, 2017). It is estimated that the introduction of the internet of things in the agricultural sector will add R469 billion to the value of production by 2025 (Kulistikova, 2017c).
In addition, Russia and China are working together in innovative technology to develop high yield seed and animal
husbandry in the Russian Far East, cooperation that has already led to 85 patents (Kvedomosti.ru, 2017d). The critical point is that the introduction of new technology will make corporate farms more productive, more profitable,
and economically stronger. Russia's smallholders clearly are not integrated into the technological revolution and
are left behind.
One problem for Russia's smallholders is that the acquisition of hightech agricultural equipment is very expensive, requiring either selffinancing or access to significant credit. Because most smallholders do not have sufficient
capital to buy new technology on their own, incentives are created for smallholders to pool their resources to buy
farm equipment (Poluchateli, 2018). In terms of credit, federally subsidized credit for lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo
ended in 2007, leaving owners with only the option to mortgage their land as collateral, but banks are often reluctant
to extend loans to household gardeners. A second problem is suitabilityis hightech equipment actually usable on
land plots that average less than 1 ha? The reality is that most smallholders are unable to use advanced technologies
and production techniques.
Further, the technology gap will grow because the government is committed to the transformation of the agricultural sector in order to improve Russia's standing in the global food regime. Towards this end, in August 2017,
the federal government adopted a programme on the scientifictechnological development of agriculture that will
run 20172025, with R26 billion in federal funding (Postanovlenie, 2017). This scientifictechnological programme
is intended to support previous programmes on the development of science and technology in agriculture (2013
2020), the development of education (20132020), and the information society (20112020). Smallholders as a category are not targeted for resources in these programmes. Furthermore, the Ministry of Agriculture announced a programme called Digitalization of agriculture to be introduced in 2019. Large farms will receive subsidies to acquire
robots to test the soil for moisture and fertilizer and to monitor production. Each robot is estimated to cost about
R2.5 millionfar beyond the means of the average smallholderand will be able to cover 100,000150,000 ha per
season. These robots will be able to increase yield and reduce losses. At present, digital technology is used on only
about 10% of arable land, but by 2026, that will increase to 50% under this programme (Kvedomosti.ru, 2018b).
To support the dispersion of hightech equipment into agricultural production processes, recruitment efforts are
underway to attract 90,000 IT specialists who will work for large farms. Young specialists in particular are targeted,
who are believed will want to work with robots and other hightech equipment in agriculture. These initiatives are
intended for large farms and not the smallholder sector.

5

|

C O N CL U S I O N

I have argued that Russia's smallholders confront path dependencies and institutional arrangements in the form of
regional policies that limit production potential. Further, Russia's aspirations in the global food regime marginalize
smallholders. Smallholders consume their household production and are isolated from markets and supply chains,
thereby rendering them unable to contribute to Russia's status in the global food regime. Set in the context of other
papers in this symposium, Russian smallholders have not had the success found in Central Asian states as described
by Sedik and Lerman. Russia's smallholders are not as integrated into value chains as in Eastern Europe, described by

922

WEGREN

Swinnen and Burkitbayeva. Nor do smallholders have the political clout to protect their interests, the importance of
which is shown by Falkowski in his paper on Poland.
Since 2004, Russia's agrarian policy has favoured the concentration of economic power in agroholdings, who
have become dominant players in the agricultural system. Mamonova, for example, observes that in Russia, big capital
has gained control over agricultural land, monopolizes the value chain for food products and inputs, and receives the
majority of state subsidies. As a result, this control grabbing limits diversification within rural communities based on
access to productive resources. The majority of households are unable to accumulate land and capital for commercial
farming (Mamonova, 2016, pp. 2223). Although it is unlikely that lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo will become extinct,
in the competition between big capital and small capital, big capital is likely to win (Bernstein, 2010).
My central argument is that Russia's technological transformation in agriculture is determining the future role of
smallholders. Although big capital modernizes, smallholder production remains based on manual labour. Smallholders
lack financial means to acquire new technologies. Most smallholders are unable to afford new technologies or adapt
their use to their scale of farming. The upshot is that smallholders find it difficult to compete against producers who
increase output and efficiency through advanced technology. Smallholders will be relegated to selfreproduction and
isolation from broader macrotransformation, a cycle that ultimately reduces their economic significance. In short, the
Russian case supports the argument that as big capital grows more powerful, smallholders become increasingly
disadvantaged.
ACKNOWLEDGEMEN TS
The author acknowledges and thanks Alexander Nikulin and four anonymous referees for comments on an earlier
version of this paper. Research was supported by the Norwegian Research Council, grant 243630/H30.
ORCID
Stephen K. Wegren

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2846-2306

RE FE R ENC ES
Agarwal, B. (2014). Food sovereignty, food security, and democratic choice: Critical contradictions, difficult conciliations. The
Journal of Peasant Studies, 41(6), 12471268.
Agrofakt. (2016a). Roboty dlia sbora iablok ot kompanii Abundant Robitics Inc. [Robots for the harvesting of apples from the
company Abundant Robitics Inc.]. 16 August. www.agronews.ru
Agrofakt. (2016b). Tkachev: Rossiia mozhet eksportirovat do 50 mln tonn zerna v god [Tkachev: Russia may export up to 50
million tons of grain a year]. 18 July. www.agronews.ru
Bernstein, H. (2010). Class dynamics of agrarian change. Halifax: Fernwood Publishing.
Bernstein, H. (2014). Food sovereignty via the peasant way: a sceptical view. The Journal of Peasant Studies, 41(6), 10311063.
Birner, R., & Resnick, D. (2010). The political economy of policies for smallholder agriculture. World Development, 38(10),
14421452.
Burkitbayeva, S., & Swinnen, J. (2018). Smallholder agriculture in transition economies. Journal of Agrarian Change, 18(4),
882892. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12284
Danilov, V. P. (1988). Rural Russia under the new regime. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Diatlovskaia, E. (2017). Gosduma mozhet ogranichit pogolov'e skota v lichnykh khoziaistvakh [The State Duma may limit the
number of cattle in personal subsidiary farming]. 6 March. http://www.agroinvestor.ru/technologies/news/26354
gosdumamozhetogranichitpogoloveskota/
Diatlovskaia, E. (2018). Proizvodstvo teplichnykh tomatov vyroslo na 25% [The production of greenhouse tomatoes
increased by 25%]. January. http://www.agroinvestor.ru/analytics/news/29240proizvodstvoteplichnykhtomatov
vyroslona25/
Dries, L., Reardon, T., & Swinnen, J. F. M. (2004). The rapid rise of supermarkets in Central and Eastern Europe: Implications
for the agrifood sector and rural development. Development Policy Review, 22(5), 525556.
Durr, J. (2016). The political economy of agriculture for development today: The small versus large scale debate revisited.
Agricultural Economics, 47, 671681.

WEGREN

923

Epshtein, D., Hahlbrock, K., & Wandel, J. (2013). Why are agroholdings so pervasive in Russia's Belgorod Oblast? Evidence
from case studies and farmlevel data. PostCommunist Economies, 25(1), 5981.
Falkowski, J. (2018). Together we stand, divided we fall? Smallholders' access to political power and their place in Poland's
agricultural system. Journal of Agrarian Change, 18(4), 893903. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12278
Fan, S., Brzeska, J., & Olofinbiyi, T. (2015). The business imperative: Helping small family farmers to move up or move out. In
20142015 global food policy report, International Food Policy Research Institute (pp. 2531). Washington, DC: IFPRI.
Forbes.ru. (2017). 685 mln dollarov investitsii v iskusstvennyi intellect i robotov v APK [685 million dollars of investment in
artificial intellect and robots in the agroindustrial complex]. 9 August. www.agromedia.ru
Friedmann, H. (1988). The political economy of food: The rise and fall of the postwar international food order. American
Journal of Sociology, 88, S248S286.
Ganenko, I. (2017). Ne te den'gi [Not that money]. Agroinvestor, 2, 1420.
Goldsmith, A. (1985). The private sector and rural development: Can agribusiness help the small farmer? World Development,
13(1011), 11251138.
Golovina, S., & Nilsson, J. (2011). The Russian topdown organised cooperativesReasons behind the failure. PostCommunist
Economies, 23(1), 5567.
Goskomstat SSSR. (1989). Lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo naseleniia v 1988 godu [Personal subsidiary farming of the population
in 1988]. Moscow: Goskomstat SSSR.
Interfax. (2017). Proizvodstvo traktorovbespilotnikov planiruetsia naladit v techenie trekh let [The production of pilotless
tractors is planned in the three years]. 13 July. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/proizvodstvotraktorovbespilotnikov
planiruetsyanaladitvtechenietrexlet.html.
Kakushkin, A. (2017). Milliardy v zakrytom grunte [Billions for covered soil]. Agroinvestor, 1, 2429.
Kalugina, Z. I. (1991). Lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo v SSSR [Personal subsidiary farming in the USSR]. Novosibirsk: Nauka.
Kalugina, Z. I. (2000). Survival strategies of enterprises and families in the contemporary Russian countryside. In L. Alexander
Norsworthy (Ed.), Russian Views of the Transition in the Rural Sector: Structures, Policy Outcomes, and Adaptive Responses
(pp. 118131). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
King, A. (2017). The Future of agriculture. Nature, 544(April), S21S23.
Kniazeva, A. (2017). Aleksandr Tkachev: My mozhem stat vedushchei agrarnoi derzhavoi [Alexander Tkachev: We are able
to become a leading agrarian power]. Sel'skaia zhizn, 511 October, 3.
Koester, U. (2005). A revival of large farms in Eastern EuropeHow important are institutions? Agricultural Economics, 32(1),
103113.
Kulistikova, T. (2017a). Top20 po kormam [Top 20 for feed]. Agroinvestor, 5, 5664.
Kulistikova, T. (2017b). Proizvodstvo svininy v Rossii ubelichitsia na 600 tysiach tonn [The production of pork in Russia
increased by 600 thousand tons]. 2 July. http://www.agroinvestor.ru/markets/news/28105proizvodstvosvininyv
rossiiuvelichitsyana600tysyachtonn/
Kulistikova, T. (2017c). Vnedrenie Interneta veshchei prineset APK 469 mldr rublei [Introduction of the internet of things will
bring 469 billion rubles to the agroindustrial complex]. 4 August. http://www.agroinvestor.ru/technologies/news/
28325vnedrenieinternetaveshcheyprinesetapk469mlrdrubley/
Kulistikova, T. (2017d). V reiting Agroinvestora voshlo 25 kompanii s obshchii proizvodstvom 4.3 mln tonnb miasa [In the
rankings by Agroninvestor are 25 companies that produce 4.3 million tons of meat]. 5 September. http://www.
agroinvestor.ru/analytics/news/28479vreytingagroinvestoravoshlo25kompaniysobshchimproizvodstvom43
mlntonnmyasa/
Kunle, M. (2017). Perspektivy agrarnogo eksporta [Prospects for agrarian exports]. 1 September. http://www.agroinvestor.
ru/markets/article/28453perspektivyagrarnogoeksporta/
Kvedomosti.ru. (2016). Minsel'khoz RF podderzhivaet lokal'nyi zapret na svinovodstvo v LPKh [The Ministry of Agriculture of
the Russian Federation supports local prohibition on pig raising in personal subsidiary farming]. 6 December. www.
kvedomosti.ru
Kvedomosti.ru. (2017a). V sel'skom khoziaistve vrpevye primeniiat lazernye tekhnologii [In agriculture the first applications of
laser technology]. 7 July. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/vselskomxozyajstvevpervyeprimenyatlazernyetexnologii.html
Kvedomosti.ru. (2017b). Viktor Semenov: Rossiiskoe sel'skoe khoziaistvo perezhivaet agrorenssans [Russian agriculture is
experiencing an agrorenassiance]. 30 August. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/viktorsemenovrossijskoeselskoe
xozyajstvoperezhivaetagrorenessans.html
Kvedomosti.ru. (2017c). Biudzhet proekta po eksportu produktsii APK na 2017 godu mozhet uvelichit'sia na 100 mln rublei
[The budget for the project on the export of products from the agroindustrial complex in 2017 may increase by 100

924

WEGREN

million rubles]. 1 September. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/byudzhetproektapoeksportuprodukciiapkna2017godu
mozhetuvelichitsyana100mlnrublej.html
Kvedomosti.ru. (2017d). RossiiskoKitaiskie innovatsii v sel'skom khoziaistve Khabarovskogo kraia [RussianChinese
innovation in agriculture of Khabarovsk krai]. 11 September. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/rossijskokitajskieinnovaciiv
selskomxozyajstvexabarovskogokraya.html
Kvedomosti.ru. (2018a). Tkachev: Rossiya mozhet uvelichit ob'em eksporta prodovol'stviya do $50 mlrd k 2024 godu
[Tkachev: Russia may increase the volume of exports to $50 billion by 2024]. 3 March. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/
tkachevrossiyamozhetuvelichitobemeksportaprodovolstviyado50mlrdk2024godu.html
Kvedomosti.ru. (2018b). Na polia po vsei strane zapustiat sotni robotovissledovatelei [In the fields of the entire country
hundreds of robotinvestigators will be introduced]. 5 April. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/napolyapovsejstrane
zapustyatsotnirobotovissledovatelej.html
Lerman, Z., & Sedik, D. (2018). Transition to smallholder agriculture in Central Asia. Journal of Agrarian Change, 18(4),
904912. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12282
Maksimova, E. (2017). Precision farming dlia Rossiiskikh agrariev [Precision farming for Russian agrarians]. Agroinvestor, 7, 5461.
Maksimova E., & Ganenko I. (2018). Teplichnaia otraslodin iz samykh rentabel'nykh sektorov APK [The greenhouse branch
One of the most profitable sectors in the APK]. January. http://www.agroinvestor.ru/analytics/news/29182teplichnaya
otraslodinizsamykhrentabelnykhsektorovapk/
Mamonova, N. V. (2016). Rethinking rural politics in postsocialist settings: Rural communities, land grabbing and agrarian change
in Russia and Ukraine. Netherlands: Ph.D. Dissertation, Eramus University Rotterdam.
McMichael, P. (2013). Food regimes and agrarian questions. Halifax: Fernwood Publishing.
Mudrats, A. (2017). Eksperty: dlia bor'by s AChS neobkhodimo vyvesti iz teni chastnoe podvor'e [Experts: To combat swine
flu it is necessary to bring private gardens out of the shadows]. 12 September. http://tass.ru/vstrane/4554449
My sposobny kormit polmira [We Are Able to Feed Half the World]. (2013). Sel'skaia zhizn, 31 January6 February, 2.
Nefedova, T., & Pellot, D. (2006). Neizvestnoe sel'skoe khoziaistvo, ili Zachem nuzhna korova? [Unknown agriculture, or why is a
cow needed?]. Moscow: Novoe.
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
North, D. C. (2005). Capitalism and economic growth. In V. Nee, & R. Swedberg (Eds.), The economic sociology of capitalism
(pp. 4152). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
O razvitii zernovogo rynka [On the Development of the Grain Market]. (2009). Sel'skaia zhizn, 1824 June, 1, 3.
OECD. (1991). The Soviet agrofood system and agricultural trade. Washington, DC: OECD.
Pallot, J., & Nefedova, T. (2007). Russia's unknown agriculture: Household production in postsocialist rural Russia. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pavenskii, I. (2017). Eksportnozernovoi top [Top grain exporters]. Agroinvestor, 7, 4853.
Petrikov, A. (2016). Kommentarii. O prioritetakh nauchnotekhnologicheskoi politiki v APK Rossii [Commentary. On the priorities of scientifictechnological policy in the agroindustrial complex of Russia]. 27 October. http://kvedomosti.ru/
news/kommentarijoprioritetakhnauchnotexnologicheskojpolitikivapkrossii.html
Poluchateli dal'nevostochnykh gektarov kooperiruiutsia dlia zakupok sel'skokhoziaistvennoi tekhniki [Recipients of Far Eastern
Hectares are Cooperating to Purchase Agricultural Equipment]. (2018). 12 January. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/
poluchatelidalnevostochnyxgektarovkooperiruyutsyadlyazakupokselskoxozyajstvennojtexniki.html
Postanovlenie ot 25 Avgusta 2017 g., no. 996. (2017). 25 August. www.mcx.ru (under the pull down menu State Support,
then link for State Programs).
Presssluzhba Minsel'khoza RF. (2017). Vysokie tekhnologii obespechat APK vykhod na novyi uroven razvitiia [High technology provides the agroindustrial complex a pathway to a new level of development]. 13 September. www.agromedia.ru
Reardon, T., Barrett, C. B., Berdegue, J. A., & Swinnen, J. F. M. (2009). Agrifood industry transformation and small farmers in
developing countries. World Development, 37(11), 17171727.
Reardon, T., Timmer, C. P., & Berdegue, J. (2008). The rapid rise of supermarkets in developing countries: Induced
organizational, institutional and technological change in agrifood systems. In E. B. McCullough, P. L. Pingali, & K. G.
Stamoulis (Eds.), The transformation of agrifood systems: Globalization, supply chains and smallholder farmers
(pp. 4765). London: Earthscan.
Regnum I. A., (2017). Robotizirovannoe priozvodstvo syrokopchenoi produktsii otkroiut v Podmoskov'e [Robotization of production of smoked cheese products will open in the Moscow region]. 2 June. www.agromedia.ru
Rossii P., (2016). Utverzhden pasport prioritetnogo proekta Eksport produktsii APK [Confirmation of the priority project
Export of Products of the Agronindustrial Complex]. 9 December. http://government.ru/news/25591

WEGREN

925

Rosstat (2008). Itogi Vserossiiskoi sel'skokhoziaistvennoi perepisi 2006 goda: Zemel'nye resursy [Results of the AllRussia
agricultural census of 2006: land resources]. Moscow: Rosstat.
Rosstat (2010). Itogi pilotnogo vyborochnogo obsledovaniia ispol'zovaniia (biudzheta) vremeni naseleniem [Results of a pilot investigation of use of time (budget) by the population]. Moscow: Rosstat.
Rosstat (2017a). Rossiia v tsifrakh 2016 [Russia in figures 2016]. Moscow: Rosstat.
Rosstat (2017b). Vserossiiskaia sel'skokhoziaistvennaia perepis' 2016 goda: predvaritel'nye itogi Vserossiiskoi
sel'skokhoziaistvennoi perepisi 2016 goda po Rossiiskoi Federatsii [AllRussia agricultural census of 2016: Preliminary results
of the AllRussia agricultural census of 2016 in the Russian federation]. Moscow: Rosstat.
Rylko, D., Khramova, I., Uzun, V., & Jolly, R. (2008). Agroholdings: Russia's new agricultural operators. In Z. Lerman (Ed.),
Russia's agriculture in transition: Factor markets and constraints on growth (pp. 95133). Lanham: Lexington Books.
Serova, E. (2007). Results of transformation of Russian agrifood sector. In M. Heinonen, J. Nikula, I. Kopoteva, & L. Granberg
(Eds.), Reflecting transformation in postsocialist rural areas (pp. 829). New Castle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 2007)
Top10 latifundistov (2017). Top 10 latifundia. Agroinvestor, 6, 15.
Tul'chev, V., Lukin, D., & Lukin, N. (2017). Kooperatsiia i integratsiia malykh form khoziaistvovaniiaperspektiva razvitiia APK
i obshchego agrarnogo rynka EAES [Cooperation and integration of small forms of farmingProspects for the development of the agroindustrial complex and the broader agrarian market of the Eurasian Economic Union]. APK: Ekonomika,
upravlenie, 7, 2232.
Uzun, V., & Saraikin, V. (2012). Ekonomicheskaia klassifikatsiia lichnykh podsobnykh khoziaistv [An economic classification of
personal subsidiary farming]. APK: ekonomika, upravlenie, 1, 4148.
Uzun, V., & Shagaida, N. (2015). Agrarnaia reforma v Postsovetskoi Rossii: mekhanizmy i resul'taty [Agrarian reform in post
Soviet Russia: Processes and results]. Moscow: Delo.
V APK bylo sozdaneo 100 tys. novykh rabochikh mest [In the APK 100 thousand new jobs were created]. (2017). 12 April.
www.agromedia.ru.
V Minsel'khoze predrekli ischeznovenie lichnykh podsobnykh khoziaistv cherez 1520 let [In the Ministry of Agriculture
They Forecast the Disappearance of Personal Subsidiary Farming in 1520 Years]. 2017. 9 March. http://kvedomosti.
ru/news/vminselxozepredrekliischeznovenielichnyxpodsobnyxxozyajstvcherez1520let.html.
V Rostove vypustiat pervyi v Rossii bespolitnyi kombain [In Rostov the First Pilotless Combine in Russia Appears]. (2017). 19
August. http://kvedomosti.ru/news/vrostovevypustyatpervyjvrossiibespilotnyjkombajn.html.
Van der Ploeg, J. D. (2008). The new peasantries: Struggles for autonomy and sustainability in an era of empire and globalization.
London: Earthscan.
Visser, O., Mamonova, N., Spoor, M., & Nikulin, A. (2015). Quiet food sovereignty as food sovereignty without a
movement? Insights from postsocialist Russia. Globalizations, 12(4), 513528.
Volin, l. (1971). A century of Russian agriculture: From Alexander II to Khrushchev. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wadekin, K. E. (1973). The private sector in Soviet agriculture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wegren, S. K. (1998). Agriculture and the State in Soviet and postSoviet Russia. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Wegren, S. K. (2009). Land reform in Russia: Institutional design and behavioral responses. New Haven and London: Yale
University Press.
Wegren, S. K. (2014). Rural inequality in divided Russia. New York and London: Routledge Publishers.
Wegren, S. K., Nikulin, A., & Trotsuk, I. (2018). Food policy and food security: Putting food on the Russian table. Lanham:
Lexington Books.
World Bank. (2017). ICT in agriculture: Connecting smallholders to knowledge, networks, and institutions. Washington, DC: The
World Bank.
Zappa, M. (2014). 15 emerging agricultural technologies that will change the world. Business Insider. 5 May. http://www.
businessinsider.com/15emergingagriculturetechnologies20144

How to cite this article: Wegren SK. The left behind: Smallholders in contemporary Russian agriculture. J
Agrar Change. 2018;18:913925. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12279

View publication stats

