Artificial Intelligence: Potential Benefits and
Ethical Considerations
KEY FINDINGS
 The ability of AI systems to transform vast amounts of complex, ambiguous
information into insight has the potential to reveal long-held secrets and help solve
some of the worlds most enduring problems.
 However, like all powerful technologies, great care must be taken in its development
and deployment. To reap the societal benefits of AI systems, we will first need to trust
them and make sure that they follow the same ethical principles, moral values,
professional codes, and social norms that we humans would follow in the same
scenario. Research and educational efforts, as well as carefully designed regulations,
must be put in place to achieve this goal.
 International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) is actively engaged, both internally
as well as with its collaborators and competitors, in global discussions about how to
make AI ethical and as beneficial as possible for people as society.

1. WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE?
The term artificial intelligence (AI) has been mentioned for the first time in 1956 by John
McCarthy during a conference where several scientists decided to meet to see if machines could
be made intelligent. Since then, AI is usually defined as the capability of a computer
program to perform tasks or reasoning processes that we usually associate to intelligence
in a human being. Often it has to do with the ability to make a good decision even when there
is uncertainty or vagueness, or too much information to handle.
As an example, playing chess well, or some complex card games, is believed to need some
form of intelligence in a human being, as well as choosing the best diagnosis in a difficult
medical case, or creating something new, such as a mathematical theorem or even some form
of art, or even driving a car in the middle of a crowded city.
It is clear that this is a strange definition, because it depends on what we consider being
intelligent in the behaviour of a human being at a certain point in time. If our belief about
human intelligence changes, and we don't believe any longer that a certain task requires
intelligence, then a computer program performing that task is no longer part of AI, it becomes
just another boring computer program.
The term artificial intelligence brings to mind to the notion of replacing human intelligence
with something synthetic. At IBM, we prefer the term augmented intelligence. This means
that we aim to build systems that enhance and scale human expertise and skills rather than
replacing them. We therefore focus on practical applications of discrete AI capabilities that
assist people in performing well-defined tasks, by exploiting a wide range of AI-based services.
We also use the term Cognitive Computing, to mean a comprehensive set of capabilities
based on technologies which include AI, but that go far beyond it. Cognitive Computing

Author: Francesca Rossi
Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs
European Parliament
PE 571.380

EN

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

comprises the fields of machine learning, reasoning and decision technologies, language,
speech and vision recognition and processing technologies, human interface technologies,
distributed and high-performance computing, and new computing architectures and devices.
When purposefully integrated, these capabilities are designed to solve a wide range of practical
problems, boost productivity, and foster new discoveries across many industries.

2. AI IN OUR LIVES
There are many examples of the presence of AI in our current life, that we dont even know of.
Whenever we buy something with a credit card, an AI algorithm approves that transaction (or
not). When we use the GPS in our car, the algorithm that finds the best way to go from where
we are to where we need to go is called the A* algorithm and it is an essential tool for AI,
present in every AI teaching book. Spam filters are based on AI. Recommender systems such
as that of Amazon are AI. The Google translate service, which nowadays is able to translate
from and to more than 70 languages, is based on statistical machine learning, which is part of
AI. Even web searches, such as those that we ask of Google or Baidu or other search engines,
rely on AI to give us the web pages that are most relevant to our query. The face recognition
capability of any of our cameras, shown usually with a green rectangle around each face we
want to take a picture of, is AI. Siri, the IPhone app that understands us when we speak and
responds (usually) in a useful way, is based on AI algorithms for speech understanding.
And of course there is the whole branch of robotics, which is more easily associated with AI
because of the iconic image of humanoid robots that make it seem that humans have been
reproduced artificially. Of course not all of them are intelligent in the way we would say a
human is intelligent, but they are usually very good at doing what they are supposed to in their
environment, from the Roomba robot that cleans the floors of our houses, to the Baxter robot
that can work together with humans in production chains, passing through the Kiva warehouse
robots that can take care of the tasks of an entire warehouse and the companion robots like
Nao, Pepper, Aibo, and Giraff, who can entertain us, talk to us, and help elderly people to stay
connected to their friends, relatives, and doctors.
The realm of possible uses of AI techniques is enormously vast, and this is one of the reasons
why many companies have been heavily investing in AI in recent years. Google is building selfdriving cars and has acquired more than 10 robotics companies, Facebook had opened a whole
new research facility focused only on AI research, Apple has developed Siri, Microsoft has built
Cortana, a similar personalized assistant, Google has acquired DeepMind, a UK company whose
long-term aim is to build general AI and has already shown great potential in winning at the
game of Go the current world champion, and IBM is investing a huge amount of resources in
applying its Watson cognitive computing system to the medical domain, to finance, and to
personalized education, just to name a few. This expansion of AI-based systems and services
is reaching all corners of the globe. In Europe, IBM is establishing new centres in Munich and
Milan focused on the application of cognitive computing capabilities to the Internet of Things
and healthcare, respectively.
Self-driving cars are all about AI: they need to be able to see what happens in the street
(signals, lanes, other cars, pedestrians, traffic lights), they need to able to predict what other
cars and pedestrian will do, and they need to be able to cope with unforeseen situations. Since
most car accidents are due to human fault, it is estimated that the adoption of self-driving cars
will save about half of the lives that are usually lost in car accidents, which totals around 40,000
each year in the US alone. Some of us may be reluctant to hand over the wheel to an AI system,
but very soon we may wonder why we did not do it sooner!
Watson is an IBM cognitive computing system that won against the best human champions at
the Jeopardy! game in 2011. To do that, IBM Watson had to understand spoken language,
make sense of massive amount of text, respond correctly to questions in many categories, as
well as assess its own confidence in responding to such questions. The kind of
question/answering capabilities that would be very useful, for example, in assisting a doctor

2

PE 571.380

Artificial Intelligence: Potential Benefits and Ethical Considerations

when trying to come to the correct diagnosis for a patient and to propose the best therapy.
Watson puts together many AI results and algorithms, from text and speech understanding, to
reasoning with uncertainty, to optimization.
IBM is not new to tackling daunting challenges and successfully addressing them. In 1997, the
Deep Blue computer program won against the world chess champion Garry Kasparov. This was
very iconic, since chess, as I said above, is one of those activities that we believe requires a
significant amount of intelligence in a human being. Deep Blue showed that computers could
do better than the best humans when it comes to certain tasks.

3. AI AND COMPUTING POWER
We have to be careful in labelling all this promising progress as truly intelligent. Humans
need intelligence and good intuition in playing chess because our brain does not have enough
computing power to make sense of a lot of data. In chess, for example, it is not possible for
our brain to evaluate all possible sequences of moves of us and our opponent in a very short
time. If we could do that, it would be obvious to us what the best move is. Contrarily to our
brain, computers can rely on a computing power that, according to Moores law, doubles every
about 18 months. Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, in 1965 noticed that this was the trend
in putting transistors into a single chip, and to the amazement of many, this law has been
followed since then in our computers.
This law means that computer processing power doubles every 18, or, seen from another point
of view, every 18 months we can have a much cheaper computer with the same speed as the
old one. For example, it has been calculated that an IPhone in 1991 would have cost about
$3,6 million. And this is only for its processor, its memory, and its connectivity. Todays smart
phones are more powerful than NASA computers that in 1969 sent a man to the moon. This is
how much computing power has increased over the years.

4. AI AND DATA
AI is not all about computing power. Intelligent machines can also rely on huge amounts of
data, to be used to learn how to make better and better decisions. This data comes from all of
us. Over the years, Facebook users have uploaded more than 250 billion pictures, and every
day they upload about 350 million more. Every second, we submit 40,000 Google search
queries, which means 3.5 billion per day and 1.2 trillion per year. As of today, there are 2
billion people connected to internet, which is estimated to get to 5 billion by 2020. And by that
time, also 50 billion things will be connected through the web: from appliances to traffic
lights, from cars to watches.

5. MACHINES VS HUMANS
No matter how much data and computing power is available to machines, there are tasks that
are still difficult for machines to perform, but that remain very easy for humans. Machines and
humans are very complementary. A typical example is understanding what is depicted in an
image.
How do we know that an image contains a cat? Because during our life we have seen many
examples of cats and non-cats, and at some point we got a very good idea of how a cat should
look like, so much that we dont have problems recognizing one even if we have never seen it
before, and even if it is in a strange position.
Machines need humans to provide them with many examples. A lot of progress has been made
in this, but we are still working hard to improve their accuracy in labelling pictures or other
perception capabilities

PE 571.380

3

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

Other tasks that are very easy for humans are physical and manipulation tasks such as walking,
running, picking up an object no matter its shape and location. Robots can do this only in
restricted environments. But they are still not able to have the general physical and
manipulation capabilities even of a 6 year old.

6. AI ETHICS AND TRUST
The ability of AI systems to transform vast amounts of complex, ambiguous information into
insight has the potential to reveal long-held secrets and help solve some of the worlds most
enduring problems. AI systems can potentially be used to help discover insights to treat
disease, predict the weather, and manage the global economy. It is an undeniably powerful
tool. And like all powerful tools, great care must be taken in its development and deployment.
However, to reap the societal benefits of AI systems, we will first need to trust it. The right
level of trust will be earned through repeated experience, in the same way we learn to trust
that an ATM will register a deposit, or that an automobile will stop when the brake is applied.
Put simply, we trust things that behave as we expect them to.
Trust is built upon accountability. As such, the algorithms that underpin AI systems need to be
as transparent, or at least interpretable, as possible. In other words, they need to be able to
explain their behaviour in terms that humans can understand  from how they interpreted
their input to why they recommended a particular output. To do this, we recommend all AI
systems should include explanation-based collateral systems.
But trust will also require a system of best practices that can help guide the safe and ethical
management of AI systems including alignment with social norms and values; algorithmic
responsibility; compliance with existing legislation and policy; assurance of the integrity of the
data, algorithms and systems; and protection of privacy and personal information.
One of the primary reasons for including algorithmic accountability in any AI system is to
manage the potential for bias in the decision-making process. This is an important and valid
concern among those familiar with AI. Bias can be introduced both in the data sets that are
used to train an AI system, and by the algorithms that process that data. At IBM, we believe
that the biases of AI systems can not only be managed, but also that AI systems themselves
can help eliminate many of the biases that already exist in human decision-making models
today.
AI systems should function according to values that are aligned to those of humans, so that
they are accepted by our societies and by the environment in which they are intended to
function. This is essential not just in autonomous systems, but also in systems based on
human-machine collaboration, since value misalignment could preclude or impede effective
teamwork. It is not yet clear what values machines should use, and how to embed these values
into them. Several ethical theories, defined for humans, are being considered (deontic,
consequentialist, virtue, etc.) as well as the implications of their use within a machine, in order
to find the best way to define and adapt values from humans to machines.
In industries like healthcare and finance, the relevant professional ethical principles are
explicitly encoded and practiced by professionals in the field already. In AI systems designed
to help professionals in these domains, these best practices and principles could form the core
of the ethics module for such systems. Ethics modules, however, should be constantly adapted
to reflect humans best practices in their everyday profession.
We envision a future in which every AI system will need to have its own ethics module to allow
for a fruitful interaction and collaboration with humans in the environments in which it is used.
This could be achieved by developing an ethics API that can be adapted to specific professions
and real-life scenarios. It would provide the main principles and values the AI systems should
base its behaviour on, as well as the capability to dynamically adapt them over time to tune
them to the real situations that are encountered in that profession or environment. Such a
4

PE 571.380

Artificial Intelligence: Potential Benefits and Ethical Considerations

rigorous approach could offer sufficient value alignment without compromising the full problemsolving potential of artificial intelligence.

7. IBM AND AI
IBM has been researching, developing and investing in AI technology for more than 50 years.
In 1997, IBM Deep Blue bested then world chess champion Garry Kasparov, showing that
innovative AI algorithms and computational power can play a complex game at super-human
levels. In 2011, IBM Watson won at Jeopardy! against the best human players, showing that
AI can also perform very well in natural language understanding and reasoning with
uncertainty.
These are just the tip of the iceberg compared to what IBM has been achieving over the years
in the field of AI. We have been transforming the original Watson program into a fully fledged
platform and we have exploited it to successfully apply AI to many industrial sectors, including
healthcare, finance, commerce, education, security, and the Internet of Things. The whole
company is deeply committed to AI, since we believe strongly in its potential to benefit society
while transforming our personal and professional lives.
As mentioned above IBM prefer the term augmented intelligence and therefore focuses on
practical applications of AI capabilities that assist people in performing well-defined tasks, by
exploiting a wide range of AI-based services. With this aim in mind, IBM researchers, in tight
collaboration with several universities, produce continuous innovations in area such as machine
learning, knowledge modelling, reasoning and decision technologies, human interface,
automated perception, data assurance, and computing infrastructures. Most of these research
efforts cannot be achieved by AI researchers alone. Collaboration with experts in multiple
disciplines  such as psychology, philosophy, sociology, art, regulation, and law  is crucial.
We believe that new companies, new jobs, and entirely new markets will be built on the
shoulders of this powerful technology. Moreover, AI systems will improve access to critical
services for underserved populations. Overall, we anticipate widespread improvements in the
quality of life.

8. IBM AND AI ETHICS
In order to be fully accepted into society, AI systems need to have significant social capabilities,
because their presence in our lives has a profound impact on our emotions and on our decision
making capabilities. Also, AI systems need to understand how to learn and comply with specific
behavioural principles for aligning with human values. To take full advantage of the potential
societal benefits of AI, we will need to trust AI, whether we speak of autonomous systems or,
as is the focus of IBM, of human/machines partnerships. Trust will be earned over time and via
natural interaction modalities. Trust will also require a system of best practices that can guide
the safe and ethical development and management of AI, a carefully thought alignment with
social norms and values, algorithmic accountability, compliance with existing legislation and
policy, and protection of privacy and personal information.
IBM is in the process of developing this system internally, with our collaborators, and also with
our competitors. More precisely, IBM is engaged in several efforts  both internally and
externally  to advance our understanding and effecting the ethical development of artificial
intelligence. They include:

The establishment of an internal IBM Cognitive Ethics Board, to discuss, advise and
guide the ethical development and deployment of AI systems.

A company-wide educational curriculum on the ethical development of cognitive
technologies.

PE 571.380

5

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs


The creation of the IBM Cognitive Ethics and Society research program, a multidisciplinary research program for the ongoing exploration of responsible development of AI
systems aligned with our personal and professional values.

Participation in cross-industry, government and scientific initiatives and events around
AI and ethics, such as the recently launched Partnership on AI, the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy AI workshops, the International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, and the conference of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence.

Regular, ongoing IBM-hosted engagements with a robust ecosystem of academics,
researchers, policymakers, NGOs and business leaders on the ethical implications of AI.

9. IBM AND EUROPE
IBM is an international company with a strong history and presence in Europe:
The IBM Zurich research lab is supported by a multicultural and interdisciplinary team of a few
hundred people from about 45 nationalities who work in diverse areas such as chip
technologies, nanotechnology, fibre optics, supercomputing, data storage, security and privacy,
risk and compliance, business optimization and transformation, and server systems. The Zurich
lab is involved in many joint projects with universities throughout Europe, in research programs
established by the European Union and the Swiss government, and in cooperation agreements
with research institutes of industrial partners.
The recently opened IBM Watson IoT Headquarters in Munich is applying Watson to the Internet
of Things and helping many companies (from automotive, insurance, electronics, banks, and
industrial sectors) to transform their business by extending the power of AI to the billions of
connected devices, sensors and systems that comprise the IoT.
The recently announced IBM Watson Health European Centre of Excellence, that will be placed
within the Human Technopole Lab in Milan, is supporting the government of Italys initiative to
establish an international hub for the advancement of genomics, big data, aging, and nutrition.
The Centre is expected to provide access to resources and technology designed to help
accelerate research into new treatment options, promote personalized medicine, and
encourage discoveries aimed at improving overall public health management while advancing
sustainable health systems.

10.

AI AND POLICIES

AI technology is changing so rapidly, and has so many applications to the real world, that it is
difficult for any government or regulatory agency to keep up with them and to meaningfully
and timely guide the deployment of AI systems. However, some issues like data privacy and
ownership have been considered in the EU, as well as algorithm transparency and
accountability.
An example is the recently released General Data Protection Regulation, that will take effect as
law across the EU in 2018 and will restrict automated individual decision-making (that is,
algorithms that make decisions based on user-level predictors) which "significantly affect"
users. The law will effectively create a so-called "right to explanation," whereby a user can ask
for an explanation of an algorithmic decision that was made about them. Another example is
the very recently released USA federal policy on automated vehicles, that is already in effect.
The main point of all these policies is to make sure that society can take full advantage of the
capabilities of AI systems while minimizing the possible undesired consequences on people.
Safety is very important, as well as fairness, inclusiveness, and equality. These and other
properties should be assured of AI systems, or at least we should be able to assess the limits
of an intelligent machine, so to not overtrust it. It is therefore very important the policies and
regulations help society in using AI for the best of all.
6

PE 571.380

Artificial Intelligence: Potential Benefits and Ethical Considerations

Ethical issues, including safety constraints, are essential in this respect, since an AI system
that behaves according to our ethical principles and moral values would allow humans to
interact with it in a safe and meaningful way.
It is clear that a lack of regulations would open the way to unsafe developments. However, also
excessive regulations would have a cost to society, since they would not allow us to take
advantage of all the potential benefits that AI can bring, such as saving lives, curing diseases,
and solving planetary problems.
IBM is eager to work with governments, media, other companies, regulatory agencies, and
industry sectors in a meaningful discussion on ethical issues of AI, with the aim of clearly
identifying the potential and limits of AI, and carefully understanding how to harness it for the
best of all.

PE 571.380

7

Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs

