THE PROMISE AND
CHALLENGE OF THE AGE OF
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
BRIEFING NOTE
PREPARED FOR THE TALLINN DIGITAL SUMMIT
OCTOBER 2018
Summary: The time may have finally come for
artificial intelligence (AI) after periods of hype
followed by several AI winters over the past
60 years. Today, announcements of technical
breakthroughs enabling superhuman performance
by machines follow one another in rapid
succession. AI now powers so many real-world
applications, ranging from facial recognition to
language translators and assistants like Siri and
Alexa, that we barely notice it. Along with these
consumer applications, companies across sectors
are increasingly harnessing AIs power in their
operations. Embracing AI promises considerable
benefits for businesses and economies through
its contributions to productivity growth and
innovation. Already, adopters are starting to reap
benefits, but adoption is still at a relatively early
stage and uneven, and AI readiness varies widely
among companies, sectors, and countries.
At the same time, AIs impact on work is likely
to be profound. Some occupations as well as
demand for some skills will decline, while others
grow and many change as people work alongside
ever-evolving and increasingly capable machines.
While most scenarios we have developed
suggest that more jobs will be created than lost to
automation, the transition is likely to be disruptive,
and occupations and skill requirements will shift
significantly. AI also has the potential to contribute
to tackling pressing societal challenges, from
healthcare to climate change and humanitarian
crises, but it could also introduce or exacerbate
social challenges, through its use and misuse,

and challenges related to bias, privacy, and
cybersecurity. Given its economic and other
benefits, policy makers and business leaders
should embrace AI, but put in place measures to
facilitate adoption, soften the disruptive transitions
that will accompany it, and place a new focus on
responsible use.
This briefing note draws on ongoing research by
the McKinsey Global Institute into AI technologies
and their uses, limitations, and impact. It
concludes with a set of issues that policy makers
and business leaders will need to address. A list of
the main sources used in the note and suggestions
for further reading appear at the end.

1. AIS TIME MAY HAVE FINALLY COME,
BUT MORE PROGRESS IS NEEDED
The term artificial intelligence was popularized
at a conference at Dartmouth College in the
United States in 1956 that brought together
researchers on a broad range of topics, from
language simulation to learning machines. Despite
periods of significant scientific advances in the
six decades since, AI has often failed to live up to
the hype that surrounded it. Decades were spent
trying to describe human intelligence precisely,
and the progress made did not deliver on the
earlier excitement. Since the late 1990s, however,
technological progress has gathered pace,
especially in the past decade. Machine-learning
algorithms have progressed, especially through the
development of deep learning and reinforcementlearning techniques based on neural networks.

Several other factors have contributed to the
recent progress. Exponentially more computing
capacity has become available to train larger and
more complex models; this has come through
silicon-level innovation, including the use of
graphics processing units and tensor processing
units, with more on the way. This capacity is being
aggregated in hyperscale clusters, increasingly
being made accessible to users through the cloud.
Another key factor is the massive amounts of data
being generated and now available to train AI
algorithms. Some of the progress in AI has been
the result of system-level innovations. Autonomous
vehicles are a good illustration of this: they take
advantage of innovations in sensors, LIDAR,
machine vision, mapping and satellite technology,
navigation algorithms, and robotics all brought
together in integrated systems.
Despite the progress, many hard problems remain
that will require more scientific breakthroughs.
So far, most of the progress has been in what is
often referred to as narrow AI where machinelearning techniques are being developed to solve
specific problems, for example in natural language
processing. The harder issues are in what is
usually referred to as artificial general intelligence,
where the challenge is to develop AI that can tackle
general problems in much the same way that
humans can. Many researchers consider this to be
decades away from becoming reality.

Deep learning and machine-learning
techniques are driving AI
Much of the recent excitement about AI has been
the result of advances in the field known as deep
learning, a set of techniques to implement machine
learning that is based on artificial neural networks.
These AI systems loosely model the way that
neurons interact in the brain. Neural networks have
many (deep) layers of simulated interconnected
neurons, hence the term deep learning. Whereas
earlier neural networks had only three to five layers
and dozens of neurons, deep learning networks
can have ten or more layers, with simulated
neurons numbering in the millions.
There are several types of machine learning:
supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and
reinforcement learning, with each best suited to
certain use cases. Most current practical examples
of AI are applications of supervised learning. In
supervised learning, often used when labeled data
are available and the preferred output variables

2

McKinsey Global Institute

are known, training data are used to help a
system learn the relationship of given inputs to a
given outputfor example, to recognize objects
in an image or to transcribe human speech.
Unsupervised learning is a set of techniques
used without labeled training datafor example,
to detect clusters or patterns, such as images of
buildings that have similar architectural styles, in
a set of existing data. In reinforcement learning,
systems are trained by receiving virtual rewards
or punishments, often through a scoring system,
essentially learning by trial and error. Through
ongoing work, these techniques are evolving.

Limitations remain, although new
techniques show promise
AI still faces many practical challenges, though
new techniques are emerging to address them.
Machine learning can require large amounts of
human effort to label the training data necessary
for supervised learning. In-stream supervision,
in which data can be labeled in the course of
natural usage, and other techniques could help
alleviate this issue. Obtaining data sets that are
sufficiently large and comprehensive to be used
for trainingfor example, creating or obtaining
sufficient clinical-trial data to predict healthcare
treatment outcomes more accuratelyis also
often challenging. The black box complexity of
deep learning techniques creates the challenge of
explainability, or showing which factors led to a
decision or prediction, and how. This is particularly
important in applications where trust matters
and predictions carry societal implications, as in
criminal justice applications or financial lending.
Some nascent approaches, including local
interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME),
aim to increase model transparency. Another
challenge is that of building generalized learning
techniques, since AI techniques continue to have
difficulties in carrying their experiences from one
set of circumstances to another. Transfer learning,
in which an AI model is trained to accomplish a
certain task and then quickly applies that learning
to a similar but distinct activity, is one promising
response to this challenge.
2. BUSINESSES STAND TO BENEFIT
FROM AI
While AI is increasingly pervasive in consumer
applications, businesses are beginning to
adopt it across their operations, at times with
striking results.

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

AIs potential cuts across industries
and functions
AI can be used to improve business performance
in areas including predictive maintenance, where
deep learnings ability to analyze large amounts of
high-dimensional data from audio and images can
effectively detect anomalies in factory assembly
lines or aircraft engines. In logistics, AI can optimize
routing of delivery traffic, improving fuel efficiency
and reducing delivery times. In customer service
management, AI has become a valuable tool in call
centers, thanks to improved speech recognition.
In sales, combining customer demographic and
past transaction data with social media monitoring
can help generate individualized next product to
buy recommendations, which many retailers now
use routinely.
Such practical AI use cases and applications
can be found across all sectors of the economy
and multiple business functions, from marketing
to supply chain operations. In many of these
use cases, deep learning techniques primarily
add value by improving on traditional analytics
techniques. Our analysis of more than 400 use
cases across 19 industries and nine business
functions found that AI improved on traditional
analytics techniques in 69 percent of potential
use cases. In only 16 percent of AI use cases
did we find a greenfield AI solution that was
applicable where other analytics methods would
not be effective. Our research estimated that deep
learning techniques based on artificial neural
networks could generate as much as 40 percent of
the total potential value that all analytics techniques
could provide by 2030. Further, we estimate that
several of the deep learning techniques could
enable up to $6 trillion in value annually.

So far, adoption is uneven across
companies and sectors
Although many organizations have begun to
adopt AI, the pace and extent of adoption has
been uneven. Nearly half of respondents in a
2018 McKinsey survey on AI adoption say their
companies have embedded at least one AI
capability in their business processes, and another
30 percent are piloting AI. Still, only 21 percent say
their organizations have embedded AI in several
parts of the business, and barely 3 percent of large
firms have integrated AI across their full enterprise
workflows. Other surveys show that early AI
adopters tend to think about these technologies
more expansively, to grow their markets or
increase market share, while companies with
McKinsey Global Institute

less experience focus more narrowly on reducing
costs. Highly digitized companies tend to invest
more in AI and derive greater value from its use.
At the sector level, the gap between digitized
early adopters and others is widening. Sectors
highly ranked in MGIs Industry Digitization Index,
such as high tech and telecommunications, and
financial services are leading AI adopters and have
the most ambitious AI investment plans. As these
firms expand AI adoption and acquire more data
and AI capabilities, laggards may find it harder to
catch up.

Several challenges to adoption persist
Many companies and sectors lag in AI adoption.
Developing an AI strategy with clearly defined
benefits, finding talent with the appropriate skill
sets, overcoming functional silos that constrain
end-to-end deployment, and lacking ownership
and commitment to AI on the part of leaders are
among the barriers to adoption most often cited
by executives. On the strategy side, companies
will need to develop an enterprise-wide view
of compelling AI opportunities, potentially
transforming parts of their current business
processes. Organizations will need robust data
capture and governance processes as well as
modern digital capabilities, and be able to build
or access the requisite infrastructure. Even more
challenging will be overcoming the last mile
problem of making sure that the superior insights
provided by AI are inculcated into the behavior
of the people and processes of an enterprise.
On the talent front, much of the construction and
optimization of deep neural networks remains an
art requiring real expertise. Demand for these skills
far outstrips supply; according to some estimates,
fewer than 10,000 people have the skills necessary
to tackle serious AI problems, and competition
for them is fierce. Companies considering the
option of building their own AI solutions will need to
consider whether they have the capacity to attract
and retain workers with these specialized skills.
3. ECONOMIES ALSO STAND TO
BENEFIT FROM AI, PRIMARILY
THROUGH INCREASED PRODUCTIVITY
AND INNOVATION
Deployment of AI and automation technologies
can do much to lift the global economy and
increase global prosperity. At a time of aging and
falling birth rates, productivity growth becomes
critical for long-term economic growth. Even in the
near term, productivity growth has been sluggish in
developed economies, dropping to an average of

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

3

0.5 percent in 201014 from 2.4 percent a decade
earlier in the United States and major European
economies. Much like previous general-purpose
technologies, AI has the potential to contribute to
productivity growth.

AI could contribute to economic impact
through a variety of channels
The largest economic impacts of AI will likely
be on productivity growth through labor market
effects, including substitution, augmentation,
and contributions to labor productivity. Our
research suggests that labor substitution could
account for less than half of the total benefit. AI will
augment human capabilities, freeing up workers
to engage in more productive and higher-value
tasks, and increase demand for jobs associated
with AI technologies. AI can also boost innovation,
enabling companies to improve their top line by
reaching underserved markets more effectively
with existing products, and over the longer term,
creating entirely new products and services. AI
will also create positive externalities, facilitating
more efficient cross-border commerce and
enabling expanded use of valuable cross-border
data flows. Such increases in economic activity
and incomes can be reinvested into the economy,
contributing to further growth. The deployment of
AI will also bring some negative externalities that
could lower, although not eliminate, the positive
economic impacts. On the economic front, these
include increased competition that shifts market
share from nonadopters to front-runners, the costs
associated with managing labor market transitions,
and potential loss of consumption for citizens
during periods of unemployment, as well the
transition and implementation costs of deploying
AI systems.
All in all, these various channels net out to
significant positive economic growth, assuming
businesses and governments proactively manage
the transition. One simulation we conducted using
McKinsey survey data suggests that AI adoption
could raise global GDP by as much as $13 trillion
by 2030, about 1.2 percent additional GDP growth
per year. This effect will build up only through time,
however, given that most of the implementation
costs of AI may be ahead of the revenue potential.

The AI readiness of countries
varies considerably
The leading enablers of potential AI-driven
economic growth, such as investment
and research activity, digital absorption,
connectedness, and labor market structure
4

McKinsey Global Institute

and flexibility, vary by country. Our research
suggests that the ability to innovate and acquire
the necessary human capital skills will be among
the most important enablersand that AI
competitiveness will likely be an important factor
influencing future GDP growth.
Countries leading the race to supply AI have unique
strengths that set them apart. Scale effects enable
more significant investment, and network effects
enable these economies to attract the talent
needed to make the most of AI. For now, China
and the United States are responsible for most
AI-related research activities and investment. A
second group of countries that includes Germany,
Japan, Canada, and the United Kingdom have
a history of driving innovation on a major scale
and may accelerate the commercialization of AI
solutions. Smaller, globally connected economies
such as Belgium, Singapore, South Korea, and
Sweden also score highly on their ability to foster
productive environments where novel business
models thrive. Countries in a third group, including
but not limited to Brazil, India, Italy, and Malaysia,
are in a relatively weaker starting position, but they
exhibit comparative strengths in specific areas on
which they may be able to build. India, for instance,
produces around 1.7 million graduates a year
with STEM degreesmore than the total of STEM
graduates produced by all G-7 countries. Other
countries, with relatively underdeveloped digital
infrastructure, innovation and investment capacity,
and digital skills, risk falling behind their peers.

4. AI AND AUTOMATION WILL HAVE A
PROFOUND IMPACT ON WORK
Even as AI and automation bring benefits to
business and the economy, major disruptions to
work can be expected.
About half of current work activities (not
jobs) are technically automatable
Our analysis of the impact of automation and AI on
work shows that certain categories of activities are
technically more easily automatable than others.
They include physical activities in highly predictable
and structured environments, as well as data
collection and data processing, which together
account for roughly half of the activities that people
do across all sectors in most economies. The
least susceptible categories include managing
others, providing expertise, and interfacing with
stakeholders. The density of highly automatable
activities varies across occupations, sectors, and,
to a lesser extent, countries. Our research finds
that about 30 percent of the activities in 60 percent

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

of all occupations could be automatedbut that
in only about 5 percent of occupations are nearly
all activities automatable. In other words, more
occupations will be partially automated than
wholly automated.

to workers entering the workforce and that, in
developed economies, the approximate balance
between jobs lost and those created in our
scenarios is also a consequence of aging, and thus
fewer people entering the workforce

Three simultaneous effects on work: Jobs
lost, jobs gained, jobs changed
The pace at and extent to which automation will
be adopted and impact actual jobs will depend on
several factors besides technical feasibility. Among
these are the cost of deployment and adoption,
and the labor market dynamics, including labor
supply quantity, quality, and associated wages.
The labor factor leads to wide differences across
developed and developing economies. The
business benefits beyond labor substitution
often involving use of AI for beyond-human
capabilitieswhich contribute to business cases
for adoption are another factor. Social norms,
social acceptance, and various regulatory factors
will also determine the timing. How all these factors
play out across sectors and countries will vary, and
for countries will largely be driven by labor market
dynamics. For example, in advanced economies
with relatively high wage levels, such as France,
Japan, and the United States, jobs affected by
automation could be more than double that in
India, as a percentage of the total.

No less significant are the jobs that will change as
machines increasingly complement human labor
in the workplace. Jobs will change as a result
of the partial automation described above, and
jobs changed will affect many more occupations
than jobs lost. Skills for workers complemented
by machines, as well as work design, will need
to adapt to keep up with rapidly evolving and
increasingly capable machines.

Given the interplay of all these factors, it is difficult
to make predictions but possible to develop
various scenarios. First, on jobs lost: our midpoint
adoption scenario for 2016 to 2030 suggests
that about 15 percent of the global workforce
(400 million workers) could be displaced by
automation. Second, jobs gained: we developed
scenarios for labor demand to 2030 based on
anticipated economic growth through productivity
and by considering several drivers of demand for
work. These included rising incomes, especially
in emerging economies, as well as increased
spending on healthcare for aging populations,
investment in infrastructure and buildings, energy
transition spending, and spending on technology
development and deployment. The number of
jobs gained through these and other catalysts
could range from 555 million to 890 million, or
21 to 33 percent of the global workforce. This
suggests that the growth in demand for work,
barring extreme scenarios, would more than offset
the number of jobs lost to automation. However,
it is important to note that in many emerging
economies with young populations, there will
already be a challenging need to provide jobs
McKinsey Global Institute

Four workforce transitions will
be significant
Even if there will be enough work for people in
2030, as most of our scenarios suggest, the
transitions that will accompany automation and AI
adoption will be significant.
First, millions of workers will likely need to change
occupations. Some of these shifts will happen
within companies and sectors, but many will occur
across sectors and even geographies. While
occupations requiring physical activities in highly
structured environments and in data processing
will decline, others that are difficult to automate will
grow. These could include managers, teachers,
nursing aides, and tech and other professionals,
but also gardeners and plumbers, who work
in unpredictable physical environments. These
changes may not be smooth and could lead to
temporary spikes in unemployment.
Second, workers will need different skills to thrive
in the workplace of the future. Demand for social
and emotional skills such as communication and
empathy will grow almost as fast as demand
for many advanced technological skills. Basic
digital skills have been increasing in all jobs.
Automation will also spur growth in the need for
higher cognitive skills, particularly critical thinking,
creativity, and complex information processing.
Demand for physical and manual skills will decline,
but these will remain the single largest category
of workforce skills in 2030 in many countries. The
pace of skill shifts has been accelerating, and it
may lead to excess demand for some skills and
excess supply for others.
Third, workplaces and workflows will change
as more people work alongside machines. As
self-checkout machines are introduced in stores,
for example, cashiers will shift from scanning

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

5

merchandise themselves to helping answer
questions or troubleshoot the machines.
Finally, automation will likely put pressure on
average wages in advanced economies. Many
of the current middle-wage jobs in advanced
economies are dominated by highly automatable
activities, in fields such as manufacturing and
accounting, which are likely to decline. High-wage
jobs will grow significantly, especially for high-skill
medical and tech or other professionals. However,
a large portion of jobs expected to be created,
such as teachers and nursing aides, typically have
lower wage structures.
In tackling these transitions, many economies,
especially in the OECD, start in a hole, given
the existing skill shortages and challenged
educational systems, as well as the trends toward
declining expenditures on on-the-job training
and worker transition support. Many economies
are already experiencing income inequality and
wage polarization.

5. AI WILL ALSO BRING BOTH SOCIETAL
BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES
Alongside the economic benefits and challenges,
AI will impact society in a positive way, as it helps
tackle societal challenges ranging from health and
nutrition to equality and inclusion. However, it is
also creating pitfalls that will need to be addressed,
including unintended consequences and misuse.
AI could help tackle some of societys most
pressing challenges
By automating routine or unsafe activities and
those prone to human error, AI could allow humans
to be more productive and to work and live more
safely. One study looking at the United States
estimates that replacing human drivers with
more accurate autonomous vehicles could save
thousands of lives per year by reducing accidents.
AI can also reduce the need for humans to work in
unsafe environments such as offshore oil rigs and
coal mines. DARPA, for example, is testing small
robots that could be deployed in disaster areas to
reduce the need for humans to be put in harms
way. Several AI capabilities are especially relevant.
Image classification performed on photos of skin
taken via a mobile phone app could evaluate
whether moles are cancerous, facilitating earlystage diagnosis for individuals with limited access
to dermatologists. Object detection can help
visually impaired people navigate and interact with
their environment by identifying obstacles such as
cars and lamp posts. Natural language processing

6

McKinsey Global Institute

could be used to track disease outbreaks by
monitoring and analyzing text messages in
local languages.
Our work and that of others has highlighted
numerous use cases across many domains where
AI could be applied for social good. For these
AI-enabled interventions to be effectively applied,
several barriers must be overcome. These include
the usual challenges of data, computing, and
talent availability faced by any organization trying
to apply AI, as well as more basic challenges of
access, infrastructure, and financial resources that
are particularly acute in remote or economically
challenged places and communities.

AI will need to address societal concerns,
including unintended consequences,
misuse, algorithmic bias, and questions
about data privacy
In economic terms, difficult questions will need
to be addressed about the widening economic
gaps across individuals, firms, sectors, and even
countries that might emerge as an unintended
consequence of deployment. Other areas of
concern include the use and misuse of AI. These
range from use in surveillance and military
applications to use in social media and politics,
and where the impact has social consequences
such as in criminal justice systems. We must also
consider the potential for users with malicious
intent, including in areas of cybersecurity. Multiple
research efforts are currently under way to
identify best practices and address such issues in
academic, nonprofit, and private-sector research.
Some concerns are directly related to the way
algorithms and the data used to train them
may introduce new biases or perpetuate and
institutionalize existing social and procedural
biases. For example, facial recognition models
trained on a population of faces corresponding
to the demographics of artificial intelligence
developers may not reflect the broader population.
Data privacy and use of personal information are
also critical issues to address if AI is to realize its
potential. Europe has led the way in this area with
the General Data Protection Regulation, which
introduced more stringent consent requirements
for data collection, gives users the right to be
forgotten and the right to object, and strengthens
supervision of organizations that gather, control,
and process data, with significant fines for failures
to comply. Cybersecurity and deep fakes that
could manipulate election results or perpetrate
large-scale fraud are also a concern.

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

6. SOME PRIORITIES FOR ACHIEVING
GOOD OUTCOMES
The potential benefits of AI to business and the
economy, and the way the technology addresses
some of the societal challenges, should encourage
business leaders and policy makers to embrace
and adopt AI. At the same time, the potential
challenges to adoption, including workforce
impacts, and other social concerns cannot be
ignored. Key challenges to be addressed include:
The deployment challenge. We have an interest
in embracing AI, given its likely contributions to
business value, economic growth, and social
good, at a time when many economies need to
boost productivity. Businesses and countries have
a strong incentive to keep up with global leaders
such as the United States and China. Increased
and broad deployment will require accelerating the
progress being made on the technical challenges,
as well making sure that all potential users have
access to AI and can benefit from it. Among
measures that may be needed:
 Investing in and continuing to advance AI
research and innovation in a manner that
ensures that the benefits can be shared by all.
 Expanding available data sets, especially
in areas where their use would drive wider
benefits for the economy and society.
 Investing in AI-relevant human capital and
infrastructure to broaden the talent base
capable of creating and executing AI solutions
to keep pace with global AI leaders.
 Encouraging increased AI literacy among
business leaders and policy makers to guide
informed decision making.
 Supporting existing digitization efforts that form
the foundation for eventual AI deployment for
both organizations and countries.
The future of work challenge. A starting point
for addressing the potential disruptive impacts of
automation will be to ensure robust economic and
productivity growth, which is a prerequisite for job
growth and increasing prosperity. Governments
will also need to foster business dynamism, since
entrepreneurship and more rapid new business
formation will not only boost productivity, but also
drive job creation. Addressing the issues related to
skills, jobs, and wages will require more focused
measures. These include:

McKinsey Global Institute

 Evolving education systems and learning for
a changed workplace by focusing on STEM
skills as well as creativity, critical thinking, and
lifelong learning.
 Stepping up private- and public-sector
investments in human capital, perhaps aided
by incentives and credits analogous to those
available for R&D investments.
 Improving labor market dynamism by
supporting better credentialing and matching,
as well as enabling diverse forms of work,
including the gig economy.
 Rethinking incomes by considering and
experimenting with programs that would
provide not only income for work, but also
meaning and dignity.
 Rethinking transition support and safety
nets for workers affected, by drawing on
best practices from around the world and
considering new approaches.
The responsible AI challenge. AI will not live up
to its promise if the public loses confidence in it
as a result of privacy violations, bias, or malicious
use, or if much of the world comes to blame it for
exacerbating inequality. Establishing confidence
in its abilities to do good, at the same time as
addressing misuses, will be critical. Approaches
could include:
 Strengthening consumer, data, and privacy and
security protections.
 Establishing a generally shared framework and
set of principles for the beneficial and safe use
of AI.
 Best practice sharing and ongoing innovation
to address issues such as safety, bias,
and explainability.
 Striking the right balance between the business
and national competitive race to lead in AI
to ensure that the benefits of AI are widely
available and shared.
Authors: James Manyika is chairman and director
of the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) and a senior
partner at McKinsey & Company based in San
Francisco; Jacques Bughin is an MGI director
and McKinsey senior partner based in Brussels.
Michael Chui, an MGI partner in San Francisco,
Jake Silberg in the San Francisco office, and Peter
Gumbel, MGIs editorial director, contributed to this
briefing note.

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

7

References
McKinsey Global Institute research reports
are available at www.mckinsey.com/mgi.
For this briefing note, we have drawn on the
following reports:

Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad
Syverson, Artificial intelligence and the modern
productivity paradox: A clash of expectations and
statistics, NBER working paper number 24001,
December 2017.

A labor market that works: Connecting talent with
opportunity in the digital age, June 2015.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Generative adversarial
networks, ArXiv, June 2014.

Digital America: A tale of the haves and the havemores, December 2015.

Carlos Guestrin, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Sameer
Singh, Introduction to local interpretable modelagnostic explanations (LIME), August 12, 2016,
OReilly, oreilly.com.

Digital Europe: Pushing the frontier, capturing the
benefits, June 2016.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and
productivity, January 2017.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a
time of automation, January 2018.
Skill shift: Automation and the future of the
workforce, May 2018.
Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier?
June 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds
of use cases, April 2018.
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of
AI on the world economy, September 2018.

Further reading
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Artificial
intelligence, automation and work, NBER working
paper number 24196, January 2018.
Ajay Agrawal, John McHale, and Alex Oettl, Finding
needles in haystacks: Artificial intelligence and
recombinant growth, NBER working paper number
24541, April 2018.

John Guttag, Eric Horvitz, and Jenna Wiens, A
study in transfer learning: Leveraging data from
multiple hospitals to enhance hospital-specific
predictions, Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, January 2014, volume 21,
number 4.
Eric Horvitz, Machine learning, reasoning, and
intelligence in daily life: Directions and challenges,
Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence Techniques
for Ambient Intelligence, Hyderabad, India,
January 2007.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey
E. Hinton, ImageNet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks, NIPS 12:
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems,
December 2012.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton,
Deep learning, Nature, May 2015, volume 521.
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, Artificial
Intelligence: A Modern Approach, third edition,
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Press, 2009.

McKinsey Global Institute | Copyright  McKinsey & Company 2018
www.mckinsey.com/mgi
@McKinsey_MGI
McKinseyGlobalInstitute

8

McKinsey Global Institute

The promise and challenge of the age of artificial intelligence

