Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225
www.elsevier.com/locate/medengphy

Clinical decision support systems for intensive care units: using
artificial neural networks
Monique Frize
a
b

a, b,*

, Colleen M. Ennett a, Maryhelen Stevenson c, Heather C.E. Trigg

c

Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
School of Information Technology and Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
c
University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada
Received 8 March 2000; received in revised form 23 February 2001; accepted 6 April 2001

Abstract
The paper provides an overview of applications of artificial neural networks (ANNs) to various medical problems, with a particular
focus on the intensive care unit environment (ICU). Several technical approaches were tested to see whether they improve the ANN
performance in estimating medical outcomes and resource utilization in adult ICUs. These experiments include: (1) use of the
weight-elimination cost function; (2) use of high and low nodes for input variables; (3) verifying the effect of the total number
of input variables on the results; (4) testing the impact of the value of the constant predictor on the performance of the ANNs.
The developments presented intend to help medical and nursing personnel to assess patient status, assist in making a diagnosis,
and facilitate the selection of a course of therapy.  2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd on behalf of IPEM.
Keywords: Decision-support; Artificial neural networks; Outcomes estimation; Intensive care medicine; System performance

1. Introduction
Because of their non-linear modeling capabilities, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have been widely applied
to non-linear statistical modeling problems and are a
natural choice for modeling large and complex databases
of medical information. The goal of training an ANN is
to adjust the weights of the network so as to optimize
the performance of the network in estimating outcomes
for a particular input space. For example, the input space
can be a set of medical parameters collected at the time
of patient admission to a surgical or medical intensive
care unit (ICU), or the data can be collected at different
points in time. The backpropagation training algorithm,
a popular approach used with medical databases, adjusts
the weights of an ANN to minimize a cost function. A
commonly chosen cost function is the average sum of

* Corresponding author at: Systems and Computer Engineering,
4456 MacKenzie Building, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By
Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. Tel.: +1-613-520-2600; fax: +1613-520-2109.
E-mail address: moniqueFfrize@carleton.ca (M. Frize).

squared errors between the desired outputs and actual
outputs.
It is well known that a network which has been trained
as a classifier will closely approximate a Bayes classifier
when the network architecture is sufficiently complex,
the training set is sufficiently rich, and the training algorithm succeeds in minimizing the mean squared error
[1,2]. Because a Bayes classifier is optimal in the sense
that it minimizes the probability of classification error,
successfully training a network using the backpropagation algorithm can result in a powerful tool [3]. In practice, however, the ANN error rate of a backpropagationtrained network is higher than the Bayes error rate. The
reasons for this include the fact that there are often limitations placed on the training set size and/or network
size, and the fact that the network training algorithm may
settle into a local rather than a global minimum [13].
The literature reports several applications of ANNs to
the recognition of a particular pathology. For example,
Baxt used ANNs as an aid to diagnose acute coronary
occlusion [4] and later for myocardial infarction [5];
Kuntz [6] designed a cascade-correlation ANN to estimate mortality and length of stay for patients with
closed-head injuries; Buchman et al. [7] estimated

1350-4533/01/$20.00  2001 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd on behalf of IPEM.
PII: S 1 3 5 0 - 4 5 3 3 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 0 4 1 - 8

218

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

chronicity in a surgical intensive care unit; Lau [8] discussed the principles behind the design and validation
of a decision-support system for cardiovascular ICUs;
Tu and Guerriere [9] reported estimations of length of
stay and mortality in ICUs; and Buskard et al. and Frize
et al. [1013] added studies of estimated duration of artificial ventilation to the estimation of mortality and length
of stay again in adult ICUs.

2. Background and medical context
For nearly two decades, scoring systems have been
used to predict medical outcomes [14,15]. However,
these have been more useful in estimating outcomes for
a group of patients rather than for a single patient. New
approaches should attempt to make estimates on a
patient by patient basis, and this has been a main focus
of the work reported here. In order to remain as close
as possible to the manner in which the medical model
works, an ANN model was selected which, when properly trained, provides an estimate of selected clinical outcomes, simulating a clinicians consideration of potential
patient outcomes. For example, the physician may think:
And for this particular patient, this is what I think
will happen.
Another consideration is the particularly fast pace of
illness in critically ill patients. This reality has spawned
the development of many types of testing and monitoring
technologies, rapidly evolving into complex systems
[16,17]. While medical devices used in critical care units
typically generate huge volumes of information in a
short amount of time, much of it can be lost because
physicians and nurses do not have time to read through
voluminous amounts of output in a critical care setting.
In addition, few devices are linked to hospital information systems and each generates its own separate output. This points to the need for investigating an integrated, rather than compartmentalized, approach to
critical care (and other medical environments). This, and
the need to generalize and test the tools for effectiveness
and relevance in a variety of medical contexts, have been
the basis on which the work reported here was engaged.
The move to using temporal (time-varying) data should
eventually result in a dynamic system that estimates
patient status in real-time.

3. Methodology
The importance of acquiring a good quality database,
error-free and with a standardized approach to data collection is well recognized [18]. Another important step
before analyzing the data is to ensure that outliers and
obvious errors in the data are removed before proceeding
to the analysis. Yale [19] states that 80 percent of the

time spent to get an ANN system up and running is typically used for massaging the set of training data. The
adult ICU database used in the studies reported here was
developed and assessed with the intention to remain as
close as possible to these standards.
3.1. The adult ICU database
We had access to a medical database of over 3000
adult ICU patients, containing 98 fields of clinical and
administrative information on patients admitted to the
ICU at the Doctor Everett Chalmers Hospital (DECH) in
Fredericton, NB, Canada. Data collection was primarily
prospective, with some retrospective chart review. Up to
seven medical diagnoses and multiple procedural information could be entered, with auxiliary space for freeform comments. Significant events and complications
were also noted for each patient. A subset of this database with the raw APACHE II variables extracted into
a new database was used for all experiments reported
herewith; the size of this database being limited by the
cost of the medical assistant to compile the data. The
new database contained 51 input variables with the most
complete profiles and excluded patients under the age of
12, which resulted in a database with 1491 cases [20].
The variable list of this database is shown in Table 1.
The database was also separated into postoperative
(surgical, 883 cases) and nonpostoperative (medical, 608
cases) patients for experimental purposes because these
two patient sets can have drastically different characteristics.
3.2. Data pre-processing
The nonbinary-valued inputs in the two data sets
described above were standardized. These variables were
scaled so that zero input values represented normal
values of the input variables, negative inputs represented
lower than normal values and positive inputs represented higher than normal values. The normal
values were selected in consultation with the physician
(Dr F.G. Solven, intensivist at DECH). To obtain input
data of nearly uniform magnitude, the normal value of
each nonbinary-valued variable was subtracted from
each input value and the resulting differences were divided by three standard deviations pertaining to each input
variable value over the entire data set. A zero was
assigned as the normal value for binary variables [20].
One remaining and most difficult problem, in our
experience, is the question of how to treat variables with
missing information. ANNs do not function well with
variables that contain a lot of missing information. A
common approach is to eliminate the cases with missing
data and use the remaining data set to train and to test
the network. One can also replace the missing values by
the mean or median value for the variable. In the

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

Table 1
List of variables in the adult ICU database
Demographics and Administrative Information
Assigned chronic health points in APACHE II scoring
Emergency surgery prior to ICU admission
Surgery prior to admission
Patient gender
Position in data sequencea
Patient age (years)a
APACHE II (Admission Information)
Rectal temperature (C)a
Mean arterial pressure (mmHg)a
Heart ratea
Respiratory ratea
Fraction of inspired oxygena
Partial pressure of oxygen in the blood a
Arterial pHa
Serum sodium (mmol/l)a
Serum potassium (mmol/l)a
Serum creatinine (mol/l)a
Hematocrita
White blood cell count (total/mm3 in 1000s)a
Glasgow Coma Scorea
Admission Source
Emergency Room
4SW
4E
4W
4NE
3W
4NW
3SW
Coronary Care Unit
3E
Admission from another location
Admission Diagnosis #1
Postoperative
Acute hypercapnic respiratory failure
Trauma
Drug overdose
Ketoacidosis
Sudden cessation of heart or lungs
Other diagnosis #1
Admission Diagnosis #2
Carotid endarectomy
Nothing filled in
Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Motor vehicle accident
Lobectomy
Aortobifemoral bypass
Pneumonia
Acute pulmonary edema
Other diagnosis #2
Admission Diagnosis #3
Nothing filled in
Lung cancer
Postoperative
Ischemic foot
Other diagnosis #3
a
Identifies nonbinary-valued variables. (Note: fraction of inspired
oxygen is a one-sided continuous variable, therefore, the high/low node
experiments did not require an additional node for this variable.)

219

work reported here, we decided to replace the missing
values by the normal value for the variable, which is
a third, well-accepted approach. The thinking behind this
decision is that, in a set of ICU patients, the mean may
be biased towards some particular pathology or outcome,
whereas normal values are expected to have the least
impact on the outputs. An exception to this technique
was made when almost all critical information was missing. In fact, there were only 12 cases missing a significant amount of data, so these records were eliminated
before proceeding to the experimental stage. Another
reason to select this approach was based on the physicians knowledge that, frequently, missing data occur in
medical databases when a test is not done for that patient
or the information was deemed to have little importance
with respect to the outcomes of interest for that particular
patient. Moreover, it was felt that adding a normal
value would not disrupt the results for abnormal values
since the latter are expected to have the largest impact
on poor medical outcomes. This process successfully
allowed the ANN to use information contained in incomplete records, thus providing a larger number of records
to train and test the networks [20].
3.3. Artificial neural network (ANN) designs to
estimate outcomes
3.3.1. Architecture
First, the database was divided into its two main parts
since the patient types in each were quite distinct: postoperative patients admitted to the ICU (called POSTOP,
883 patients) and those who were not admitted after a
surgery (called NONPOSTOP, 608 patients). For each
group (POSTOP and NONPOSTOP), the data were divided into a training set and a test set using two-thirds of
the data set to train the ANN and the remaining one-third
to test its performance. Using Matlabs Neural Network
Toolbox [21], a feedforward ANN was trained using the
backpropagation algorithm to estimate the following
medical outcomes: mortality, duration of artificial ventilation, and length of stay in the adult ICU [10].
Several architectures were designed, but the best
results were obtained with a simple network with one
hidden layer (i.e. a three-layer network: input layer, hidden layer, output layer) [20]. This type of network was
chosen because of its relative ease of implementation
and success in completing various classification tasks, as
demonstrated by Haykin [22] and Widrow et al. [23].
Although preliminary results were promising, the ANNs
exhibited the behavior characteristic of network memorization (or overfitting) [10]. Rather than just reducing
the input network size (and therefore network
complexity) by eliminating what might potentially be
useful input information, we chose to use a technique
called weight-elimination to overcome the overfitting
problem [24].

220

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

The following ANN network parameters were
adjusted to optimize the networks performance: learning rate and its adaptive parameters, momentum, weightelimination scale factor and its adaptive parameters,
weight-decay constant, and error ratio. It was also possible to adjust the number of hidden layers and hidden
nodes for each ANN experiment.
3.4. Four techniques to improve ANN performance
3.4.1. Impact of the weight-elimination cost function
The weight-elimination cost function includes a penalty term (in addition to the average squared error) that
serves to reduce the weights of the least important variables to zero or near zero, thereby removing their influence from the network. A series of experiments for the
POSTOP database were run using ANNs with and without the weight-elimination cost function, and results
were compared for the particular outcome: duration of
artificial ventilation less than or equal to 8 hours or
more than 8 hours. In this work, Trigg [20] verified
the accuracy of the code by testing its predictive powers
on sunspot data collected by Tong in 1983 [25]. The
ANN experiments without weight-elimination simply
used the sum of squared errors cost function.
3.4.2. Impact of high/low node approach for the
input variables
The weight-elimination approach was further combined with a novel technique whereby data were
presented to a pair of high and low nodes, depending
on the value of the parameter, again using the POSTOP
database. This means that each of the 14 nonbinaryvalued variables was presented to two nodes (a high
node and a low node) rather than to one node (i.e. in
these experiments there were 65 input nodes, as opposed
to 51 in the first set of experiments). To implement the
high/low node technique, the standardized values of nonbinary-valued variables were assigned as follows: (1) if
the value of the variable was zero or greater, it was
presented to the high input node for that variable, and
the corresponding low input was assigned a value of
zero; (2) if the value of the variable was negative, its
absolute value was assigned to the low input node and
the corresponding high input node was set to zero. It
was hoped that this technique would facilitate the independent interpretation of higher- or lower-than-normal
values of input parameters in predicting medical outcomes rather than simply abnormal values. For
example, a fever (i.e. a higher-than-normal value) clinically presents different challenges than an abnormally
low body temperature [20].
3.4.3. Reduced network complexity (number of input
variables)
Here, the research question was: how will reducing
the number of input parameters affect the analysis time

(the number of epochs needed to reach the highest correct classification rate) and the classification rate itself,
when compared to using the full number of variables
(51) in the original database? This question was tested
using the same outcome duration of artificial ventilation: less than or equal to 8 hours; or more than 8
hours for POSTOP patients. Two input data sets were
constructed with a different number of input variables.
The first data set contained the original 51 input variables as listed in Table 1. The second data set was constructed from the six variables that attained the largest
weights after the application of the weight-elimination
cost function. The six parameters that remained after
weight elimination were: heart rate, respiratory rate,
fraction of inspired oxygen, partial pressure of oxygen
in blood, arterial pH, and Glasgow Coma Score [2628].
Note that as Triggs results [20] with this particular
database only showed a marginal benefit of using threelayer networks (a 1% improvement of the classification
rate), two-layer networks were constructed to do this
comparative analysis.
3.4.4. Impact of the constant predictor value
Our research group further expanded this research into
an analysis of how the constant predictor affects the performance of our ANNs [2628]. A constant predictor is
a statistical benchmark where all cases are classified as
belonging to the class with the highest a priori probability. In this series of experiments, we investigated
how well the ANNs classified cases into two output
classes as the representation of the dominant class
approached 100%. Six different dichotomous situations
involving the number of hours of mechanical ventilation
were investigated: less than or equal to 4 hours, 12, 24,
36 and 336 hours, and between 24 and 336 hours. Also
investigated were estimates of the length of ICU stay: 0
days, less than or equal to 1, 4, 5, and 14 days. A commonly estimated medical outcome is mortality (or survival rate), therefore, this output variable was also
investigated. Each of the above outcomes under investigation had different outcome distributions with the
dominant class ranging from 50.8 to 98.1%.

4. Results and discussion
4.1. Measures of performance
The network performance was evaluated based on the
correct classification rate of the test set (i.e. the number
of correctly classified cases divided by the total number
of cases) and the area under the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve. The number of epochs
required to reach the best test set classification rate was
noted to provide a measure of the convergence speed of
the training algorithm. The results are compared to the

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

constant predictor and the minimum distance classifier.
These classifiers gauge the difficulty of the classification
problem, and provide a lower bound for the networks
achievable performance. The standard error for the
reported classification rates and areas under the ROC
curves was approximated by measuring the maximum
variation in the results observed when each network was
trained from a set of five different initial weight conditions and estimating the appropriate value as half the
maximum variation observed.
The cost of misclassification is an important point to
consider. For example, predicting that a patient will not
survive surgery (when the patient actually lives) has a
different associated cost than foretelling survival, when
in actual fact the patient will die. In our case, we are
predicting the duration of artificial ventilation for
patients in the ICU. Misclassification may upset the
management of equipment usage in the unit; however,
it would not have a significant impact (negative or
positive) on the patient. This decision tool is designed
to aid the clinician in estimating the duration of ventilation that the patient requires, which is useful for consultations with the patient and his/her family, as well as
for resource management.

221

For the sake of completeness, Table 2 also reports that
the weight-elimination networks exceeded the performance of the constant predictor and minimum distance
classifier (improvements of 19.4% and 4.4% for the twolayer networks, and 20.7% and 5.7% for the three-layer
ANNs, respectively). These results show that using the
weight-elimination cost function can improve the classification performance of these ANNs [20].

4.1.2. Impact of high/low node approach for the
input variables
Fourteen continuous-valued physiological variables
were separated into high and low nodes as described in
the methodology section, according to their values relative to the physiological normal values. Table 3 compares results obtained with using high/low nodes for the
ANNs with the weight-elimination cost function, and
with ANNs again using weight elimination but with the
regular data representation technique (i.e. all values of
the variable are presented to the same node, whether they
are high or low). Table 3 shows a slight decline in the
classification rate for ANNs using the high/low node format compared to the regular data presentation technique
(approximately 1% and 0.3% for two- and three-layer
networks, respectively). However, these networks still
attained higher classification rates than either the constant predictor or the minimum distance classifier (18.4%
and 2.4% for the two-layer ANNS, and 20.4% and 4.4%
for the three-layer networks, respectively). The poorer
performance compared to the ANNs with the regular
data presentation approach could be due to the increased
number of input variables with the high/low networks.
Moreover, the ANNs using high/low nodes were more
complex given that the three-layer ANN required eight
hidden nodes compared to the regular weight-elimination network which only used two nodes in the hidden
layer [20].

4.1.1. Impact of the weight-elimination cost function
The weight-elimination cost function was tested with
the outcome duration of artificial ventilation less than or
equal to 8 hours or more than 8 hours for the POSTOP
patients. Table 2 shows that the weight-elimination
ANNs achieved a correct classification rate that was
approximately 1.7% better than that of the no weightelimination networks for the two-layer ANNs, and
approximately 1.3% better for the three-layer networks.
Weight elimination also eradicated the problem of overfitting previously mentioned. The ROC results show that
the networks discriminated well between the two patient
sets; however, the bounds of their standard errors overlap slightly (0.91820.0213 and 0.93010.0195 for the
two- and three-layer networks, respectively).

Table 2
Performance of ANNs using weight elimination and no weight elimination compared to the constant predictor (CP) and the minimum distance
classifier (MDC) for the POSTOP patient database
Max test set
CCRa (%)

CP (%)

Performance
improvement over
CP (%)

MDC (%)

Performance
improvement over
MDC (%)

ROCb curves

90.51.20
88.80.70

71.1
71.1

19.4
17.7

86.1
86.1

4.4
2.7

0.91820.0213
0.91650.0194

Best three-layer network
With weight elimination (51:2:1)
91.81.15
Without weight elimination (51:2:1) 90.50.90

71.1
71.1

20.7
19.4

86.1
86.1

5.7
4.4

0.93010.0195
0.92120.0195

ANN architecture

Best two-layer network
With weight elimination (51:1)
Without weight elimination (51:1)

a
b

CCR=correct classification rate.
ROC=receiver operating characteristic.

222

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

Table 3
Performance of weight-elimination ANNs using regular data presentation or high/low nodes data presentation compared to the constant predictor
(CP) and the minimum distance classifier (MDC) for POSTOP patient cases
ANN architecture

No. of input Max test set CP (%)
variables
CCRa (%)

Performance
improvement
over CP (%)

MDC
(%)

Performance
Area under
improvement
ROCb curves
over MDC (%)

51
65

90.51.20
89.50.85

71.1
71.1

19.4
18.4

86.1
87.1

4.4
2.4

0.91820.0213
0.92040.0207

Best three-layer network
With weight elimination (2 hidden nodes) 51
With weight elimination and high/low
65
nodes (8 hidden nodes)

91.81.15
91.51.00

71.1
71.1

20.7
20.4

86.1
87.1

5.7
4.4

0.93010.0195
0.94800.0146

Best two-layer network
With weight elimination
With weight elimination and high/low
nodes

a
b

CCR=correct classification rate.
ROC=receiver operating characteristic.

4.1.3. Reduced network complexity (number of input
variables)
When the number of input variables was reduced from
51 to six, the ANNs classification performance
improved. Table 4 shows the results from the two simulations. The constant predictor of the original database
was 71.1%. The highest correct classification rate for this
test set was 88.8%, an improvement of 17.7% over the
constant predictor. The results stabilized after approximately 394 epochs. For the data set with only six input
variables, the original assumption was that the results
may not be as good as for the other case. We hypothesized that there might be unknown interactions between
variables that would not be present when using only a
partial list. However, the constant predictor for this data
set was 72.4% (the difference is due to case sampling
when dividing the training and test sets) and after only
130 epochs, a classification rate of 90.5% was
obtained [26].
Comparing the results of these experiments, the simplest database with only six input variables which used
only inputs whose weights did not go to zero in Triggs
weight-elimination experiments, produced the highest
correct classification rate (90.5%) after just 130 epochs
[26]. The results of these experiments indicate that
reducing the complexity of this system increased its generalization ability to allow for a better correct classi-

fication of the test patterns based on the information provided by the training set in the fewest epochs.
4.1.4. Impact of the constant predictor value
As the distribution of the outcome variables increases
from 50.8 to 98.1%, becoming skewed towards one
possible outcome, the ANN is less able to significantly
exceed the classification performance of the constant
predictor. Fig. 1 illustrates the relationship between the
correct classification rate of the ANN and that of the
constant predictor for the POSTOP database; Fig. 2
shows the same variables for the NONPOSTOP database. These figures illustrate how the classification rate of
the ANN and of the constant predictor converge to a
theoretical limit for the superior performance of the
ANN. This occurs as the division between the two
desired output classes becomes highly skewed towards
100%. In cases where the number of sample patterns for
a particular case are quite small, after the first few passes
through the ANN everything becomes classified as
belonging to the largest classin essence, the ANN
classifies like a constant predictor. This point is the
lower limit for acceptable ANN performance. From this
information one can deduce the minimum number of
training patterns required for the ANN to identify rare
outcomes.
Using linear regression of the classification rate for

Table 4
Comparison of ANN test results
Database

No. of variables

Max CCRa (%)

ASEb at Max CCR Approx. no. epochs

All variables (demographics, APACHE II variables,
admission source, admission diagnoses)
Variables with largest weights after weight elimination

51

88.8

0.38

394

6

90.5

0.32

130

a
b

CCR=correct classification rate.
ASE=average squared error.

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

223

Fig. 1. Comparison of correct classification rate (CCR) for constant predictor and ANN using POSTOP database.

Fig. 2.

Comparison of correct classification rate (CCR) for constant predictor and ANN using NONPOSTOP database.

the ANN, we identified this limit [2628]. The point at
which the linear regression line crosses the constant predictor projections is the theoretical limit for the ANNs
performance abilities. After this point, as the division
between the output classes becomes more skewed, the
ANN starts classifying like a constant predictor or its
classification performance is worse than a constant predictor due to misclassification of patient cases. From
Figs. 1 and 2, the dominant output class may represent
at most 92.0% of the POSTOP database, and 84.5% for
the NONPOSTOP database under consideration. These
limitations cannot necessarily be directly applied to other
databases (medical or otherwise) because the ANN relies
heavily on the relationships between the input parameters. However, this information could be used as a
guideline for verifying the usefulness of ANNs as a predictor with a variety of databases and statistical distributions.
The results of these simulations imply that the ANN
had more difficulty classifying the NONPOSTOP

patients than the POSTOP patient cases. A possible
explanation is that the extreme diversity of the circumstances surrounding the patients in the NONPOSTOP
subdatabase makes them more difficult to classify or that
more such cases are needed to improve the performance.

5. Conclusion and future work
The new ANN experiments yielded interesting results,
allowing a large reduction in the complexity of the system while maintaining high correct classification rates.
The results are valid for the adult ICU databases used
in these experiments. Other databases are currently being
tested to see whether this approach is valid in a variety
of contexts. On-going work is applying the same techniques to neonatal intensive care patients (NICU) and to
cardiac surgery patients [2931].
The work reported here attempted to identify how the
performance of ANNs could be improved. We conclude

224

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

that the weight-elimination cost function not only
improved the correct classification rate for the adult ICU
database, it overcame the network memorization problem. On the other hand, the high/low node approach, in
this case, did not improve the performance of the ANNs.
This technique should, however, be applied to other
databases before considering it ineffective. The third
approach has a great potential. Reducing the complexity
of the database by eliminating variables that have little
impact on the outcome will make the system easier to
implement in a clinical environment. For example,
entering six variables into a database to assist with clinical decision making is less time consuming compared to
systems requiring the full 51 variables used in the first
experiments. The smaller database size and reduced
complexity will facilitate speedy outcome estimations
(due to a lower computational demand on the system)
for physicians and nurses when the prototype is used in
a clinical setting for this particular data set. Finally, the
impact of the constant predictor value on ANN performance may be used as a guideline when looking into
appropriate approaches for outcome estimation.
In future work, the missing data problem will be readdressed. In the work described here the missing data
were replaced with normal values and the results were
quite good. The missing value question must be further
tested with a variety of databases and medical environments.

Acknowledgements
This work was completed with the assistance of MRC
Grant CGAA-45088 and NSERC Grant 202972-97. The
research group is also grateful to Dr F.G. Solven for
providing the intensive care patient database from the
Dr E. Chalmers Hospital in Fredericton, NB, Canada.
Thanks are also due to Helena Ho who performed some
of the experiments described in this paper.

References
[1] Haykin S. Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation. New
York: MacMillan, 1994.
[2] Hinton GE. How neural networks learn from experience. Sci Am
1992;267(9):14451.
[3] Richard MD, Lippmann RP. Neural network classifiers estimate
Bayesian
a
posteriori
probabilities.
Neural
Comp
1991;3(4):46183.
[4] Baxt WG. Use of an artificial neural network for data analysis
in clinical decision-making: the diagnosis of acute coronary
occlusion. Neural Comp 1990;2(4):4809.
[5] Baxt WG. Use of an artificial neural network for the diagnosis
of myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:8438.
[6] Kuntz GR, Hammond J. Predicting outcomes after closed-head
injury (CHI) using a cascade-correlation artificial neural network.
Crit Care Med 1994;22(1):A25.

[7] Buchman TG, Kubos KL, Seidler AJ, Siegforth MJ. A comparison of statistical and connectionists models for the prediction of
chronicity in a surgical intensive care unit. Crit Care Med
1994;22(5):75062.
[8] Lau F. Development and validation of a decision-support system
for
cardiovascular
intensive
care.
Can
Med
Inf
1994;May/June:289.
[9] Tu JV, Guerriere MRJ. Use of a neural network as a predictive
instrument for length of stay in the intensive care unit following
cardiac surgery. Comput Biomed Res 1993;26:2209.
[10] Buskard T, Stevenson M, Frize M, Solven FG. Estimation of
ventilation, length of stay, and mortality using artificial neural
networks. Proc Can Conf Elec Comput Eng 1994;7269.
[11] Frize M, Buskard T, Stevenson M, Solven FG, Dunfield V. Preliminary results of the development of an artificial neural network
for the intensive care. Proc IEEE-EMBS 1993;296.
[12] Frize M, Solven FG, Stevenson M, Nickerson B, Buskard T,
Taylor K. Computer-assisted decision-support systems for patient
management in an intensive care unit. Medinfo 1995;8 Pt.
2:100912.
[13] Frize M, Solven F, Stevenson M, Nickerson BG, McGowan HCE.
Information technologies approach and development for various
medical applications. Proc Can Conf Elec Comput Eng
1996;3658.
[14] Knaus WA, Zimmerman JE, Wagner DP, Draper EA, Lawrence
DE. APACHEAcute physiology and chronic health evaluation:
a physiologically based classification system. Crit Care Med
1981;9:5917.
[15] Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmerman JE. An evaluation of outcome from intensive care in major medical centres.
Ann Intern Med 1986;104:4108.
[16] Dawant BM, Uckun S, Manders EJ, Lindstrom DP. The SIMON
Project: model-based signal acquisition, analysis and interpretation in intelligent patient monitoring. IEEE Eng Med Biol Mag
1993;12(4):8291.
[17] Misiano DR, Meyerhoff ME, Collison ME. Current and future
directions in the technology relating to bedside testing of critically ill patients. Chest 1990;97(5 Suppl):204S14S.
[18] Gardner RM, Shabot MM. Computerized ICU data management:
pitfalls and promises. Int J Clin Monit Comput 1990;7:99105.
[19] Yale K. Preparing the right data diet for training neural networks.
IEEE Spectrum 1997;Mar:646.
[20] Trigg HCE. An investigation of methods to enhance the performance of artificial neural networks used to estimate medical outcomes. Masters thesis, Electrical Engineering Department, University of New Brunswick, 1997.
[21] Demuth H, Beale M. Matlab: Neural Network Toolbox Users
Guide. Natick, MA: The Math Works Inc, 1997.
[22] Haykin S. Neural networks expand SPs horizons. IEEE Signal
Process Mag 1996;13(2).
[23] Widrow B, Rumelhart DE, Lehr MA. Neural networks: applications in industry, business, and science. Commun ACM
1994;37(3):93105.
[24] Weigend AS, Rumelhart DE, Huberman BA. Generalization by
weight-elimination with application to forecasting. In: Lippmann
RP, Moody J, Touretzky DS, editors. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann, 1991:87582.
[25] Tong H. Threshold Models in Non-Linear Time Series Analysis.
Springer, 1983.
[26] Ennett CM, Frize M. Investigation into the strengths and limitations of artificial neural networks: an application to an adult
ICU patient database. In: Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, 1998:998.
[27] Frize M, Wang L, Ennett CM, Nickerson B, Solven FG, Stevenson M. New advances and validation of knowledge management
tools for critical care using classifier techniques. In: Proceedings
of the AMIA Symposium, 1998:5538.

M. Frize et al. / Medical Engineering & Physics 23 (2001) 217225

[28] Ho H. A study of the performance of artificial neural networks
to estimate outcomes in the intensive care unit. Undergraduate
senior thesis, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 1998.
[29] Tong Y, Frize M, Walker R. Estimating ventilation using artificial
neural networks in intensive care units. Proc BMES/EMBS 1999;.
[30] Walker R, Frize M, Tong Y. Data analysis using artificial neural

225

networks and computer-aided decision-making in the neonatal
intensive care unit. Paediatric Academy Society 1999 Annual
Meeting. Paediatr Res 1999;45:231.
[31] Ennett CM, Frize M, Shaw RE. Methodologies for predicting coronary surgery outcomes. Proc. BMES/EMBS 1999.

