Performance Evaluation of
Predictive Classifiers for Pregnancy Care
Mrio W. L. Moreira1,2, Joel J. P. C. Rodrigues1,3,4, Antonio M. B. Oliveira2, Kashif Saleem5, Augusto Neto6
1

Instituto de Telecomunicaes, University of Beira Interior, Covilh, Portugal
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Cear (IFCE), Aracati, Brazil
3
National Institute of Telecommunications (Inatel), Santa Rita do Sapuca, MG, Brazil
4
University of Fortaleza (UNIFOR), Fortaleza, CE, Brazil
5
Center of Excellence in Information Assurance (CoEIA), King Saud University (KSU), Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
6
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Natal, Brazil
2

mario.moreira@it.ubi.pt; joeljr@ieee.org; amauroboliveira@gmail.com; ksaleem@ksu.edu.sa; augusto@dimap.ufrn.br
Abstract Hypertensive disorders are the leading cause of
deaths during pregnancy. Risk pregnancy accompaniment is
essential to reduce these complications. Decision support systems
(DSS) are important tools to patients accompaniment. These
systems provide relevant information to health experts about
clinical condition of the patient anywhere and anytime. In this
paper, a model that uses the Nave Bayesian classifier is
introduced and its performance is evaluated in comparison with
the Data Mining (DM) classifier named J48 Decision Tree. This
study includes the modeling, performance evaluation, and
comparison between models that could be used to assess
pregnancy complications. Evaluation analysis of the results is
performed through the use of Confusion Matrix indicators. The
founded results show that J48 decision tree classifier performs
better for almost all the used indicators, confirming its promising
accuracy for identifying hypertensive disorders on pregnancy.
Keywords e-Health; Hypertension; Decision support systems;
Bayes methods; Decision trees; Data mining; Pregnancy

I. INTRODUCTION
Although many efforts have been performed to reduce
deaths during gestation, about more than 800 women die every
day in pregnancy complications according to the World Health
Organization (WHO). Hypertensive disorders are the most
common cause of these complications occurring in about 2-3%
of pregnancies. The causes of these diseases in pregnancy have
not been well established. Research shows that there is an
association with hypertension, which can be chronic or specific
pregnancy. This disease is a risk factor for future development
of other complications. Even women who had normalization of
blood pressure after childbirth in a long term is four times
higher the risk of developing chronic hypertension. One way to
avoid the aggravation of these problems is the careful and
systematic prenatal care during pregnancy.
With the growing number of available data in healthcare,
the DM techniques could be a very important tool in
knowledge extraction of these data helping health experts in
making decisions aimed at prevention and health promotion.
DM is one of the most promising available technologies for

information extraction in huge amount of data. This is due to
the fact that companies spent lots of money in data collection
and no useful information is identified. Before these
techniques, the transformation process from data to information
(and, after, into knowledge) was performed through manual
processing by experts in order to produce reports for analysis.
However, in most situations, due to the large volume of data,
this process has become impractical. The knowledge discovery
in databases (KDD) is an attempt to address this data overload.
Wu et al. discuss the introduction of the Big Data concept
and as it is rapidly growing in all science and engineering
domains [1]. A theorem that characterizes the Big Data
expansion is based on DM perspectives. It involves the
following four domains: demand aggregation, mining and
analysis, modeling, and security and privacy. The open issues
on this data-driven model and the growing topic Big Data are
also analyzed. Mukhopadhyay et al. present the main
characteristics of each DM technique used to build efficient
predictive or descriptive models that use a large amount of data
[2]. This paper presents a comprehensive survey addressing the
recent developments of multiobjective evolutionary algorithms
based on DM techniques, and tries to solve relative problems in
a large amount of data. Some concepts related to optimization
and DM for Internet of Things (IoT) are also proposed in [3]. It
discusses the relationship between IoT and DM giving a brief
review considering the features of these two concepts. Kalegele
et al. discuss the DM usage for networks and systems
managing during last forty years [4]. This research work
discusses the perspective of the critical open issues for the
effective application of DM in heterogeneous systems. DM
presents itself as an efficient technique, responsive, reliable,
and able to capture information, which is considered important
hidden in large volumes of data.
A topic of greatest usage of decision support systems (DSS)
is the healthcare, where these systems provide relevant medical
information regarding the history/condition of patients. Wang
et al. propose a learning framework to perform the mining of
longitudinal heterogeneous event data [5]. The effectiveness of
the proposed algorithm is validated with a healthcare dataset
and shows that this optimization method can learn event

978-1-5090-1328-9/16/$31.00 2016 IEEE

patterns on a group. Tekin et al. propose a Web-based expert
system to learn about the most relevant context to assign to
each patient using DM [6]. This class of algorithms aims to
discover the best clinic and expert given a patients context.
Results show that this proposed algorithm is capable to
discover the optimal expert and clinic in a specific context.
Yang and Kundakcioglu discuss novel opportunities to extract
useful information from diverse and heterogeneous data sets in
order to make better decisions in the medical field and improve
the performance of systems on healthcare [7]. The Big Data
concept is motivating a deep transformation on healthcare
giving important opportunities for researchers in order to
conduct innovative and transformative research, mainly, in DM
techniques and health informatics [8]. This paper proposes a
model that uses the Nave Bayesian classifier to evaluate
pregnant disorders. This model is evaluated in comparison with
the well-known Decision Tree classifier J48 through a real
dataset and the results are very promising.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sections II
and III address the use of the Nave Bayes classifier and the
J48 Decision Tree classifier. Section IV presents the
performance evaluation study and results analysis considering
the proposed methods. Finally, Section V provides the
conclusion and suggestions for further works.
II. TREE-BASED CLASSIFIERS ON HEALTHCARE
A Decision Tree (DT) is defined as a data structure with
leaf nodes that indicate a class or decision nodes, which
contains a test on the value of an attribute. Kelarev et al. make
a comparison study of several methods based on decision trees
and propose a novel application of sensor data processing for
diabetes patients [9]. For this comparison, the accuracies of six
algorithms based on DTs are given and the best performance is
found for J48, NBTree, and SimpleCart. Hidayah et al. use a
dataset from vertebral column to develop an classification
model based on DTs [10]. This research joints the J48 decision
tree classifier and Bagging algorithms as a classification model.
The performance evaluation analysis of this model used 10fold cross-validation and shown the proposed method
improved the J48 classifier. Ludwig et al. investigate a fuzzy
decision tree algorithm in order to classify gene expression data
[11]. This algorithm is compared to classical DM algorithms
that are applied for classification. Results of comparing the
fuzzy decision tree with the J48 classifier show that this
algorithm outperforms the J48 in terms of accuracy in some
datasets.
The key factor for the large use of J48 algorithm in DM
comes from the fact that it proves to be suitable for procedures
involving continuous variables (data) and discrete qualitative,
presented in several databases. The J48 algorithm is considered
the one with the best results in the decision tree based
approaches that use a set of training data. On this study, the J48
algorithm is used as it has a great accuracy rate. Algorithm I
shows the proposed approach.
The information gain of an attribute A is calculated by the
equation (1).

(1)
, where T represents a set of cases and Ti (i=1 to s) are subsets
of T and comprises distinct values for the attribute A. The term
info(T) represents the entropy function described in Equation
(2), as follows.
(2)

Algorithm I.

PSEUDOCODE FOR J48 ALGORITHM.
J48 Classifier

1:
2:
3:
2:
3:

Create a node N;
if (T belongs to same category C)
{ leaf node=N;
mark N as class C;
return N; }
for i=1 to n
{ Calculate Information_gain(Ai);}
if (T belongs to same category C)
{ leaf node=N;
mark N as class C;
return N; }
for i=1 to n
{ Calculate Information_gain(Ai);}

4:

ta = testing attribute;

5:

N.ta = attribute having highest information_gain;

6:

if (N.ta==continuous)
{ find threshold; }

7:

for (Each T in the splitting of T)

8:
9:

if (T is empty)
{ child of N is a leaf node;}
else
{child of N= dtree (T) }

10:

calculate classification error rate of node N;

11:

return N;

For choice of the attribute to experiment the current node, it
is used the attribute that presents the highest gain information.
This approach minimizes the expected number of necessary
experiments to classify an object guaranteeing a simpler tree.
III. BAYESIAN CLASSIFIERS ON HEALTHCARE
The Naive Bayes classifier is probably the most widely
used classifier in Machine Learning. This classifier assumes
that attributes are conditionally independent. Despite this
method has been considered a simplistic premise, this classifier
reports the best performance in various classification tasks.
Shaikh et al. propose an electronic recording system for heart
disease prediction that uses this DM modeling technique [12].
This system is useful to extract hidden knowledge from the
health database. Brser et al. study the automatic detection of
atrial fibrillation in order to identify cardiac arrhythmias [13].
This study compares seven machine learning algorithms. The
Nave Bayes classifier was slightly better than the more
modern Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithms, but in
some classification problems, tree-based algorithms performed
well.

The Nave Bayesian algorithm [14] is presented in
Algorithm II.
Algorithm II. PSEUDOCODE FOR NAVE BAYES ALGORITHM.
Nave Bayes Classifier
1:
2:
3:
4:

training set D. Initialize X with one component;

;

for all

if

Table I. ATTRIBUTES CATEGORICAL VALUES OF
HYPERTENSIVE DISORDERS.

compute

Nave Bayes Classifier

needs to be maximized;

value of attribute Ak, for tuple X;
if ( Ak= categorical ) then
else
to predicate the class label

1 Hypertension

Normal

High

Very
High

2 Proteinuria

Absence

Traces

Severe

3 Edema

Present

Absence

4 Hypertensive disease (heart or renal)

Present

Absence

,

7:

for

all

;
8:

B. Experimental Results
The healthcare dataset used for classification includes 25
cases of hypertension with four attributes. The categorical
attributes considered for classification are shown in Table I.

maximize

5:

6:

measures the percentage of samples misclassified as positive
among all real negative.

output the classifier;

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Standard metric measurements
The above-presented classifiers are evaluated with a
healthcare dataset that includes discrete and categorical
attributes. The dataset includes data gathered from experienced
physicians organized in a database. In this research the
experiments are executed considering the metrics of precision,
recall, and F-measure for assess the classifiers performance.
Performance metrics are calculated using a predictive
classification table, known as Confusion Matrix. Performance
evaluation of the classifiers used in the healthcare dataset is
analyzed considering the confusion matrix. It uses the common
standard indicators for measuring the performance
classification of several models.
Precision (Prec.) is the proportion of the predicted relevant
data sets that were correct. Recall (Rec.) represents the
proportion of data sets that were correctly identified. Finally,
the F-measure derives from precision and recall values as
shown in Equation (3).
(3)

Considering the attributes available in Table I, the
hypertensive diseases are identified in accordance to the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems [15]. According to WHO, there are seven
hypertensive disorders, as follows: i) O10 - Pre-existing
hypertension complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium; ii) O11 - Pre-eclampsia superimposed on chronic
hypertension; iii) O12 - Gestational [pregnancy-induced]
edema and proteinuria without hypertension; iv) O13 Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension; v) O14 - Preeclampsia; vi) O15 - Eclampsia; and vii) O16 - Unspecified
maternal hypertension. In this context, this information was
used in both classifiers and the performance measures of
standard metrics were considered.
Table II. STANDARD METRICS VALUES OF NAVE BAYES CLASSIFIER
COMPUTED ON CONFUSION MATRIX PREDICTIVE PARAMETERS.

0.75

FP
Rate
0.048

0.75

0.75

Fmeasure
0.75

0.25

0.235

0.333

0.25

0.286

0.71

O11

0.667

0.045

0.677

0.677

0.677

0.955

O13

0.5

0.263

0.375

0.5

0.429

0.746

O14

0.75

0.048

0.75

0.75

0.75

0.72

O15

TP Rate

Prec.

Rec.

ROC
Area
0.917

Class
O10

Table III. STANDARD METRICS VALUES OF J48 DECISION TREE CLASSIFIER
COMPUTED ON CONFUSION MATRIX PREDICTIVE PARAMETERS.

This indicator is very significant because it only produces a
good result when the Precision and Recall are both
equilibrated.

0.75

FP
Rate
0

1

0.75

Fmeasure
0.857

0.75

0.412

0.462

0.75

0.571

0.585

O11

1

0.045

0.75

1

0.857

0.962

O13

In this research, a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
analysis was also performed. It uses sensitivity and specific
indicators. The ROC analysis is a comparison of two
characteristics: True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive
Rate (FPR). The TPR measures the number of relevant
classifications that were correctly identified while the FPR

0

0.053

0

0

0

0.759

O14

0.75

0.048

0.75

0.75

0.75

0.786

O15

TP Rate

Prec.

Rec.

ROC
Area
0.863

Class
O10

The 5-fold cross-validation method is also used in this
study. It divides the total dataset into five mutually exclusive
subsets and, from these, a subset is used for experiments and

the remaining four cases are used for training. Then, the
precision of the model is calculated. This process is performed
five times alternating circular shaped test subset. The
performance of the classifiers is presented in Tables II and III.

Figure 2 shows the ROC curve. It allows studying the
variation of the sensitivity and specificity for different
parameters. Models that present curves closest to the point
(0,1) are considered optimal models.

Figure 1 shows an illustration of the decision tree. It was
created from the attributes of considered healthcare dataset.

Fig. 1. Illustration of the Tree based on the used healthcare dataset
for this study.

Table IV shows the average standard metrics values of both
the classifiers on healthcare dataset. These results shown that
the J48 tree-based classifier has performed well in all indicators
mentioned above, that is, it is a better predictor than the Nave
Bayes classifier on identify positive or negative conditions in
patients who have or not certain hypertensive disorder.
Table IV. AVERAGE STANDARD METRICS VALUES OF NAVE BAYES AND
J48 DECISION TREE CLASSIFIERS.
Standard Metrics

J48 Decision Tree

Prec.

0.518

Fig. 2. Performance comparison of ROC curve considering J48 Decision
Tree (x) and Nave Bayes (+) classifiers for Preeclampsia class.

From the ROC analysis of Nave Bayesian classifier and
J48 Decision Tree classifier, it was found that J48 Decision
Tree classifier is a more accurate technique than the Nave
Bayes classifier.
Figure 3 shows the performance evaluation of J48 Decision
Tree classifier and Nave Bayes classifiers on standard
measures while Figure 4 shows the ROC analysis. This
analysis provides a path to select optimal models and to discard
suboptimal ones.

Nave
Bayes
0.517

Rec.

0.6

0.52

F-measure

0.543

0.514

The ROC analysis with TPR and FPR characteristics is
shown in Table V. For the TRP indicator the optimal values are
the highest as possible, while the optimal values for FRP
indicator are the lowest. Despite the Nave Bayes classifier to
have a greater ROC area, the J48 Decision Tree classifier has a
better performance on TPR and FPR indicators, i.e., it
identifies positive results that occur among all positive samples
correctly and, on the other hand, it also identifies incorrect
positive results that occur among all negative samples.
Table V. TRUE POSITIVE RATE AND FALSE POSITIVE RATE.
Standard Metrics

J48 Decision Tree

TPR

0.6

FPR

0.157
0.748

ROC Area

Nave
Bayes
0.52
0.159
0.782

Fig. 3. Performance comparison considering ROC curves of both classifiers
on standard measures.

It is noticed that there is a little difference on each
performance indicator, but the tree-based J48 classifier has a
significant better performance regarding the Recall indicator.
Despite the insignificant difference on the performance among
the J48 and Nave Bayes models, the J48 decision tree obtained
a better performance in almost all predictors with highest TPR
e lower FPR.

Inatel), Brazil, by the National Plan of Science, Technology and
Innovation (MAARIFAH), King Abdulaziz City for Science
and Technology, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Award Number
(12-INF2817-02), by Laboratrio de Redes de Computadores
(LAR-A), Aracati, Brazil, and Cincias sem Fronteiras of
Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientfico e
Tecnolgico (CNPq), Brazil through the process number
207706/2014-0.

REFERENCES
[1] X. Wu; X. Zhu; G. Q. Wu; and W. Ding, Data mining with big data,
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 26, n 1,
pp. 97-107, jan. 2014.

Fig. 4. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Analysis consiering the
True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) for
the J48 and Nave Bayes classifiers.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper the Nave Bayes and the J48 Decision Tree
classifiers were used on a real healthcare dataset to identify
several hypertensive disorders. Comparison evaluation of these
classifiers was performed, in detail, with confusion matrix and
using predictive parameters. The performance evaluation of
these two classifiers was analyzed from standard metric
measures in order to classify the healthcare dataset following
the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems.
The classification results analyzed in this study shows that
J48 Decision Tree classifier is a more accurate technique than
the Nave Bayes classifier. Although the results of these
classifiers are very close, both are used as good predictors to
decision-making problems. Therefore, the J48 Decision Tree
classifier is proposed in medical field for knowledge discovery
from the healthcare datasets to support physicians in problems
that need more attention.
Further works aim to improve classification accuracy
through better and large datasets using other kinds of
classifiers. Different types of Bayes-based and Tree-based
algorithms will be considered. A study based on Multi-instance
learning may also be considered. SVM and K-Neural Networks
are also important tools to improve the accuracy of predictive
models. Although the diagnosis of hypertensive disorders is
complex, many efforts have been carried out in order to
improve smart decision support systems that support health
experts in uncertain moments (medical diagnosis).
ACNOWLEDGEMENTS
Part of this work has been partially supported by the
Instituto de Telecomunicaes, Next Generation Networks and
Applications Group (NetGNA), Portugal, by National Funding
from the FCT - Fundao para a Cincia e a Tecnologia
through the UID/EEA/50008/2013 Project, by Finep, with

resources from Funttel, Grant No. 01.14.0231.00, under the
Radiocommunication Reference Center (Centro de Referncia em
Radiocomunicaes - CRR) project of the National Institute of
Telecommunications (Instituto Nacional de Telecomunicaes -

[2] A. Mukhopadhyay; U. Maulik; S. Bandyopadhyay; and C. A. C. Coello,
A Survey of Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithms for Data Mining:
Part I, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 18, n 1,
pp. 4-19, feb. 2014.
[3] C. W. Tsai; C. F. Lai; M. C. Chiang; and L. T. Yang, Data Mining for
Internet of Things: A Survey, IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, n 16, p. 1, first quarter 2014.
[4] K. Kalegele; K. Sasai; H. Takahashi; G. Kitagata; and T. Kinoshita,
Four Decades of Data Mining in Network and Systems Management,
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 27, n 10,
pp. 2700-2716, oct. 2015.
[5] F. Wang; N. Lee; J. Hu; J. Sun; S. Ebadollahi; and A. F. Laine, A
Framework for Mining Signatures from Event Sequences and Its
Applications in Healthcare Data, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 35, n 2, pp. 272-285, feb. 2013.
[6] C. Tekin; O. Atan; and M. Van Der Schaar, Discover the Expert:
Context-Adaptive Expert Selection for Medical Diagnosis, IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 3, n 2, pp. 220234, jun. 2015.
[7] H. Yang and E. Kundakcioglu, Healthcare Intelligence: Turning Data
into Knowledge, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 29, n 3, pp. 54-68,
may-Jun. 2014.
[8] U. Srinivasan and B. Arunasalam, Leveraging Big Data Analytics to
Reduce Healthcare Costs, IT Professional, vol. 15, n 6, pp. 21-28, nov.dec. 2013.
[9] A. V. Kelarev; A. Stranieri; J. L. Yearwood; and H. F. Jelinek,
Empirical Study of Decision Trees and Ensemble Classifiers for
Monitoring of Diabetes Patients in Pervasive Healthcare, em 15th
International Conference on Network-Based Information Systems,
Melbourne, VIC, USA, September 26-28, 2012, pp. 441-446.
[10] I. Hidayah; A. Erna P.; and M. A. Kristy, Application of J48 and
bagging for classification of vertebral column pathologies, em
International Conference on Information Technology and Multimedia
(ICIMU), Putrajaya, Malaysia, November 18-20, 2014, pp. 314-317.
[11] S. A. Ludwig; D. Jakobovic; and S. Picek, Analyzing gene expression
data: Fuzzy decision tree algorithm applied to the classification of cancer
data, em IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZIEEE), Istanbul, Turkey, August 2-5, 2015, pp. 1-8.
[12] S. Shaikh; A. Sawant; S. Paradkar; and K. Patil, Electronic recording
system-heart disease prediction system, em International Conference on
Technologies for Sustainable Development (ICTSD), Mumbai, India,
February 4-6, 2015, pp. 1-5.
[13] C. Bruser; J. Diesel; M. D. H. Zink; S. Winter; P. Schauerte; and S.
Leonhardt, Automatic Detection of Atrial Fibrillation in Cardiac
Vibration Signals, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics,
vol. 17, n 1, pp. 162-171, jan. 2013.
[14] H. K. S. Doreswamy, Performance Evaluation of Predictive
Engineering Materials Data Sets, Open Access Library Journal, vol. 3,
n 3, pp. 1-7, mar. 2011.
[15] World Health Organization, International Statistical Classication of
Diseases and Related Health Problems, vol. 2, n 10, 2010.

