Expert Review of Precision Medicine and Drug
Development
Personalized medicine in drug development and clinical practice

ISSN: (Print) 2380-8993 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tepm20

The role of artificial intelligence in precision
medicine
Bertalan Mesko
To cite this article: Bertalan Mesko (2017) The role of artificial intelligence in precision
medicine, Expert Review of Precision Medicine and Drug Development, 2:5, 239-241, DOI:
10.1080/23808993.2017.1380516
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23808993.2017.1380516

Published online: 20 Sep 2017.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 35274

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 62 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tepm20

EXPERT REVIEW OF PRECISION MEDICINE AND DRUG DEVELOPMENT, 2017
VOL. 2, NO. 5, 239241
https://doi.org/10.1080/23808993.2017.1380516

EDITORIAL

The role of artificial intelligence in precision medicine
Bertalan Mesko
The Medical Futurist Institute; Department of Behavioral Sciences, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 30 July 2017; Accepted 13 September 2017
KEYWORDS Artificial intelligence; future; precision medicine; healthcare; disruptive technology

1. Introduction
The essence of practicing medicine has been obtaining as
much data about the patients health or disease as possible
and making decisions based on that. Physicians have had to
rely on their experience, judgement, and problem-solving
skills while using rudimentary tools and limited resources.
With the cultural transformation called digital health, disruptive technologies have started to make advanced methods
available not only to medical professionals but also to their
patients. These technologies such as genomics, biotechnology,
wearable sensors, or artificial intelligence (AI) are gradually
leading to three major directions. They have been (1) making
patients the point-of-care; (2) created a vast amount of data
that require advanced analytics; and (3) made the foundation
of precision medicine.
Instead of developing treatments for populations and making the same medical decisions based on a few similar physical
characteristics among patients, medicine has shifted toward
prevention, personalization, and precision.
In this shift and cultural transformation, AI is the key technology that can bring this opportunity to everyday practice.

2. The dawn of practicing medicine
In previous centuries, healthcare has focused on working out
generalized solutions that can treat the largest number of
patients with similar symptoms. If cough syrup was good for
the majority of the coughing masses and only a few people
had a rash as an allergic reaction to it, there was no question
about treating sore throat with cough syrup. Obtaining experience and empirical evidence on a generalized basis was the
working method of the medical community since Hippocrates
until around the beginning of the twentieth century.
With the refinement of diagnostic tools, the detection of
viruses or bacteria, the development of new pharmaceuticals
and medical methods, healthcare has been going through sweeping changes since the start of the last century. The experiencebased and somewhat trial-and-error approach of medicine made
place for evidence-based medicine. As a consequence, physicians
not only prescribed treatments because their ancestors also used
the same methods, but they proved the efficacy of treatments and
diagnostic methods in scientific papers and clinical studies. They

CONTACT Bertalan Mesko

berci@medicalfuturist.com

 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

mapped extensively why sore throat is best treated with cough
syrup and started to analyze the side effects of it. People with an
allergic reaction got to know that they should rather not use it, but
turn to an alternative solution.
The challenge the twenty-first century has brought upon
medicine is based on disruptive technologies [1]. Cheap genome sequencing, advanced biotechnology, health sensors
patients use at home, and the collection of information
about patients journey in healthcare with hand-held devices
have all been producing a vast amount of data. With the
smartphone and health tracker revolutions under the name
of digital health [2], it has become impossible for a physician
to analyze all those data or simply to be up-to-date.

3. There is no precision medicine without AI
As the National Institutes of Health described it, precision
medicine is an emerging approach for disease treatment
and prevention that takes into account individual variability
in genes, environment and lifestyle for each person.[3] This
approach allows doctors and researchers to predict more
accurately which treatment and prevention strategies for a
particular disease will work in which groups of people.
It requires significant computing power (supercomputers);
algorithms that can learn by themselves at an unprecedented
rate (deep learning); and generally, an approach that uses the
cognitive capabilities of physicians on a new scale (AI).
The computing power of supercomputers has become a
battleground for countries demonstrating their power through
them [4]. Deep learning algorithms have been shown to make
diagnoses at least as well as physicians in cardiology [5],
dermatology [6], and oncology [7]. However, we need to
emphasize the importance of combining such algorithms
with the knowledge of physicians. In the grand challenge of
the International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, competitors created computational systems for detecting metastatic
breast cancer in whole slide images of sentinel lymph node
biopsies. The winner algorithm had a 92.5% success rate.
When a pathologist independently reviewed the same images,
the success rate was 96.6%. Combining the deep learning
systems predictions with the human pathologists diagnoses
increased the pathologists success rate to 99.5%, an approximately 85% reduction in human error rate [7].

The Medical Futurist Institute, Budapest, Hungary

240

B. MESKO

Table 1. A list of companies using a form of artificial intelligence to improve
health care and/or medicine.
Company
Google DeepMind
Verily
IBM Watson
Careskore
Zephyr Health
Sentrian
3Scan
Enlitic
Arterys
Atomwise
Deep Genomics

Main area of research
Mining medical records
Wearable sensors
Mining medical records
Quality of care
Identifying therapies
Remote patient intelligence platform
Radiology
Radiology
Radiology
Drug development
Genomics

AI is divided broadly into three stages: artificial narrow intelligence (ANI), artificial general intelligence, and artificial super
intelligence [8]. ANI is the most likely to appear in the next
decade. ANI could analyze data sets, draw conclusions, find
new correlations, and support physicians job. There are companies that have demonstrated how supercomputers, deep learning, and ANI could support precision medicine (Table 1).

Deep Genomics aims to identify patterns in large data sets
of genetic information and medical records, looking for mutations and linkages to disease. They are working on a new
generation of computational technologies that can tell physicians what will happen within a cell when DNA is altered by
genetic variation, whether natural or therapeutic [13].
Regarding the development of pharmaceuticals, clinical
trials take sometimes more than a decade and cost billions
of dollars. Speeding this up and making it more cost-effective
would have an enormous effect on todays health care and
how innovations reach everyday medicine. Atomwise uses
supercomputers that root out therapies from a database of
molecular structures. In 2016, Atomwise launched a virtual
search for safe, existing medicines that could be redesigned
to treat the Ebola virus. They found two drugs predicted by
the companys AI technology which may significantly reduce
Ebola infectivity. This analysis, which typically would have
taken months or years, was completed in less than 1 day [14].
Although the directions seem promising, all these companies need to demonstrate the efficacy of their method and the
safety of ANI with peer-reviewed research, which many companies have still failed to do.

4. AI in clinical practice
A major application of AI in healthcare is collecting, storing,
normalizing, and tracing data. The AI research branch of the
search giant, Google, launched its DeepMind Health project,
which is used to mine the data of medical records in order to
provide better and faster health services. In 2016, they
launched a cooperative project with the Moorfields Eye
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust to improve eye treatment [9].
To investigate how technology could help to analyze eye
scans, Moorfields shared a set of one million anonymized
eye scans with DeepMind and some related anonymous information about eye condition and disease management.
IBM Watson launched its special program for oncologists to
provide clinicians with evidence-based treatment options. Watson
for Oncology has an advanced ability to analyze the meaning and
context of structured and unstructured data in clinical notes and
reports that may be critical to selecting a treatment pathway. Then
by combining attributes from the patients file with clinical expertise, external research, and data, the program identifies potential
treatment plans for a patient [10].
IBM launched another program called Medical Sieve. It aims to
build the next-generation cognitive assistant with analytical, reasoning capabilities and a range of clinical knowledge. Medical
Sieve is qualified to assist in clinical decision-making in radiology
and cardiology. The cognitive health assistant is able to analyze
radiology images to spot and detect problems faster and more
reliably [11]. In the future, radiologists might only have to look at
the most complicated cases where human supervision is
necessary.
A Dutch company, Zorgprisma Publiek, analyzes the digital invoices of hospitals and insurance companies and uses
IBM Watson in the cloud to mine the data. They can tell if a
doctor, clinic, or hospital makes mistakes repetitively in
treating a certain type of condition in order to help them
improve and avoid unnecessary hospitalization of
patients [12].

5. Is precision medicine the end of the human
touch?
With advantages will also come ethical considerations and
legal issues. Who is to blame if an AI system makes a false
decision or prediction? Who will build in safety features? How
will the economy respond to the appearance of AI when it
starts making certain jobs useless? With driverless cars, there is
a global debate about what decisions the algorithms would
make in tricky situations. When it comes to health, this
becomes a vastly bigger ethical challenge. There are more
unanswered questions today than we can deal with and hopefully, with public discussions worldwide, this will clear up as AI
is becoming a reality.
AI also has serious limitations in healthcare. Forecasting and
prediction are mediated based on precedence in the case of
machine learning, but algorithms can be underperforming in
novel cases of drug side effects or treatment resistance where
there is no prior example to build on. Hence, AI may not replace
tacit knowledge that cannot be codified easily.
Nevertheless, precision medicine requires a myriad of disruptive technologies to be implemented into developing
treatments, practicing medicine, and delivering care.
However, data analysis, no matter how advanced it is, should
support the skills of physicians and is not meant to replace the
traditional physicianpatient relationship. In order to keep the
human touch in medicine in a way that the opportunities of
treating the right people with the most personalized therapies
are augmented, certain preparations might be useful:
(1) The creation of ethical standards about the use of AI
which are applicable to and obligatory for the whole
health-care sector. A similar example is how the
German government created the worlds first ethical
guideline for the makers of autonomous cars. The

EXPERT REVIEW OF PRECISION MEDICINE AND DRUG DEVELOPMENT

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

rules emphasize that human safety is always needs to
be prioritized over protecting animals or property and
always allow the human driver to supersede the programs decisions. However, the guideline admits that
not every ethical decision can be standardized [15].
The incrementally gradual development of AI, meaning
that every step can be clearly evaluated before proceeding to the next level of development, to give
time for mapping of the possible downsides and to
build in fail-safe systems to prevent an AI apocalypse
[16]. Independent bioethical research groups and institutions could monitor the process.
For medical professionals, acquiring basic knowledge
about how AI works in a medical setting in order to understand how such solutions will help them in their everyday
job. While no AI is meant to replace physicians, those
physicians who use AI might replace those who do not.
For patients, getting accustomed to AI and discovering
its benefits  e.g. with the help of CogniToys which
supports the cognitive development of small children
with the help of AI.
For companies developing AI solutions, peer-reviewed
research and clear communication toward the general
public about the potential advantages and risks of
using AI in medicine are needed.
For decision-makers at healthcare institutions, doing
all the necessary steps to be able to measure the
success and the effectiveness of the system. It is
also important to push companies toward offering
affordable AI solutions since it is the only way to
bring the promise of science fiction into reality and
turn AI into the stethoscope of the twenty-first century. The US FDA already approved certain AI solutions with medical purposes [17].

Through the cultural transformation called digital health, the
hierarchy of traditional medicine is transforming into an equallevel partnership between patients and caregivers. Besides
many disruptive technologies, AI has the biggest potential to
support this transition by analyzing the vast amounts of data
patients and healthcare institutions record in every moment.
By taking away the repetitive parts of a physicians job, it
might lead to being able to spend more precious time with
their patients, improving the human touch. However, AI can
only fulfill its mission if it remains a safe, efficient, and proven
aid in treating patients and improving healthcare.

Funding
This paper was not funded.

Declaration of interest
The author has no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert
testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

241

References
1. Elenko E, Underwood L, Zohar D. Defining digital medicine. Nat
Biotechnol [Internet]. 2015;33(5):456461. Available from: http://
www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nbt.3222
2. Mesk B, Drobni Z, Bnyei , Gergely B, Gyrffy Z. Digital health is a
cultural transformation of traditional healthcare. mHealth 2017.
doi: 10.21037/mhealth.2017.08.07.
3. Collins F Precision Medicine Initiative | National Institutes of Health
(NIH) [Internet]. National Institutes of Health. 2015. Accessed online
on the 25th of July, 2017 from: https://www.nih.gov/precision-med
icine-initiative-cohort-program
4. Top 500 Supercomputers [Internet]. Accessed online on the 25th of
July, 2017 from: https://www.top500.org/
5. Luo G, Sun G, Wang K, et al. A novel left ventricular volumes
prediction method based on deep learning network in cardiac
MRI. Comput Cardiol [Internet]. 2010;2017:25. Available from:
http://www.cinc.org/archives/2016/pdf/028-224.pdf
6. Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, et al. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature [Internet].
2017;542(7639):115118. Available from: http://www.nature.com/
doifinder/10.1038/nature21056
7. Wang D, Khosla A, Gargeya R, et al. Deep learning for identifying
metastatic breast cancer. eprint arXiv:1606.05718, Publication Date:06/
2016.
8. Bostrom N. Superintelligence: paths, dangers, strategies.
Superintelligence: paths, dangers, strategies [Internet]. 2014.
Accessed online on the 25th of July, 2017 from: http://ovidsp.
ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&PAGE=reference&D=psyc11&NEWS=
N&AN=2014-48585-000
9. Moorfields announces research partnership [Internet]. Accessed
online on the 25th of July, 2017 from: http://www.moorfields.nhs.
uk/news/moorfields-announces-research-partnership
10. Motzer RJ, Barrios CH, Kim TM, et al. Piloting IBM Watson Oncology
within Memorial Sloan Ketterings regional network. J Clin Oncol
[Internet]. 2014;32(25):27652772. Available from: http://meeting.
ascopubs.org/cgi/content/abstract/32/15_suppl/e17653?sid=
ad2b6d30-ec22-453b-8a8c-67c23fbd7f85%5Cnhttp://ovidsp.ovid.
com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&PAGE=reference&D=emed12&NEWS=
N&AN=71523844
11. Syeda-Mahmood T, Walach E, Beymer D, et al. Medical sieve: a
cognitive assistant for radiologists and cardiologists. Proc SPIE Prog Biomed Opt Imaging [Internet]. 2016;9785. Available from:
https://www.engineeringvillage.com/share/document.url?mid=
inspec_1229d2351572a3d7e46M407510178163171&database=ins
12. Zorgprisma Publiek [Internet]. Accessed online on the 25th of July,
2017 from: https://www.zorgprismapubliek.nl/
13. Deep Genomics [Internet]. Accessed online on the 25th of July,
2017 from: https://www.deepgenomics.com/
14. Atomwise finds first evidence towards new Ebola treatments
[Internet]. Accessed online on the 25th of July, 2017 from: http://
www.atomwise.com/atomwise-finds-first-evidence-towards-newebola-treatments/
15. Rogers K. Germany has created the worlds first ethical guidelines for driverless cars. Motherboard [Internet]. 2017. Available
from: https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/599wnz/ger
many-has-created-the-worlds-first-ethical-guidelines-for-driver
less-cars
16. Shermer M. Artificial intelligence is not a threat  yet. Sci Am
[Internet]. 2017. Available from: https://www.scientificamerican.
com/article/artificial-intelligence-is-not-a-threat-mdash-yet/
17. Arterys Receives FDA Clearance For The First Zero-Footprint
Medical Imaging Analytics Cloud Software With Deep Learning
For Cardiac MRI [Internet]. 2017. Accessed online on the 25th of
July, 2017 from: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
arterys-receives-fda-clearance-for-the-first-zero-footprint-medicalimaging-analytics-cloud-software-with-deep-learning-for-cardiacmri-300387880.html

