AGENT-BASED SYSTEMS FOR
DISASTER MANAGEMENT

I

BY FRANK FIEDRICH AND PAUL BURGHARDT

n recent years agent technology has
been successfully applied to many
different domains such as e-commerce, control systems, and
information gathering and management. Because this technology features the use of artificial
intelligence to coordinate collaborative behavior in distributed systems, it supplies a powerful basis for proactive applications
in complex organizations. Efficiently responding to large-scale disasters requires many complex tasks to be performed by multiple actors
under extreme time and resource constraints.
We expect that the application of agent technology can support more timely and enhanced
data acquisition, information production, decision support, and action coordination.
Applications of agent technologyagentbased systemscan be used to support many
processes throughout the phases of the disaster
management cycle from mitigation and preparation to actual response and recovery. Currently,
we distinguish two major research areas: agentbased simulation systems, which allow the creation of realistic post-disaster environments, and
agent-based decision support systems to support
disaster managers on various levels.
Agent-based simulation systems are generally

56

March 2007/Vol. 50, No. 3 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM

used to model human and systems behavior
during or after disaster events. By including up
to millions of agents it is possible to analyze
complex disaster scenarios and test various
response strategies. Agents in this type of system
do not provide active decision support, but
although calibration and validation of the
behavioral models is difficultthese systems
may be used to better understand the dynamics
of disasters and may also be included in computer-based training programs. Current research
includes, among other areas, post-earthquake
rescue simulation, evacuation planning, or
spread of infectious diseases.
During disaster response agent-based systems
are envisioned to support emergency managers
by helping to maintain common situational
awareness and by aiding the planning and coordination of response activities. Agent technology
may provide benefits to a number of important
system requirements for future disaster management applications. Relevant agent characteristics
include:
 Capability to act in dynamic environments as
well as distributed and decentralized networks;
 Ability to support all relevant levels of information management: information gathering,
verification, processing, analysis, interpreta-

COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM March 2007/Vol. 50, No. 3

41

tion, and action planning;
 Distributed decision making through multi-agent
communication and collaboration mechanisms;
 Possibility to integrate human-like decision making strategies, such as the Belief-Desire-Intention
(BDI) or Recognition-Primed-Decision (RPD)
model;
 Use of advanced optimization algorithms, such as
constraint programming or ant algorithms;
 Use of adjustable autonomy for human-computerinteraction, where the degree of agent autonomy
can be adjusted to different task levels; and
 Possibility to integrate trust-based collaboration
mechanisms.

A

nother important advantage is that agents may
also be used to create
combined systems of
systems that integrate
legacy information systems, mobile communication devices, sensor
networks, human decision makers, or agent-based simulations. Used in this
manner, agents are a way to implement a networkcentric approach to emergency management. Examples of recent or ongoing research projects include
Robocup Rescue [3], Combined Systems [5], Aladdin
[2], EQ-Rescue [1], or FireGrid/I-Rescue [4]. The
common characteristic of these research projects is
their focus on crossing the boundary between generic
research on agents and possible applications in the
domain of disaster management. For example, within
the Combined Systems project at DECIS lab
(www.combinedsystems.nl) demonstrators were built
for agent-based models for medical response planning
and self-evacuation of buildings as well as for distributed perception networks that may be used for environmental and industrial alert systems.
Despite these promising research projects there are
hardly any agent systems used in disaster management practice. We believe in the next few years major
opportunities lie in planning and training applications that use agent-based simulation systems. Virtual
reality systems on top of these simulations will allow
improved training through serious gaming. In the
short term, intelligent planning agents will mainly be
used in those simulated environments. The implementation of more sophisticated agent technology
will take longer, but basic applications for specific
tasks can be used to incrementally improve current
42

March 2007/Vol. 50, No. 3 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM

support tools. For advanced systems to succeed, a better understanding of disaster management principles
and cognitive processes of disaster managers is essential. Challenges for agent-related research are manifold. They include, for example, the development of
comprehensive disaster-related ontologies, which
allow the development of agent-based collaboration
mechanisms across organizational boundaries, and
the development of agent models with improvising
capabilities to create or adjust plans on the fly.
The question is often raised whether it is realistic at
all to expect agent-based systems to be of use for disaster management. In the past, technological solutions often failed because they did not take into
account realities of emergency management decision
making and inter-/intra-organizational management
practices. While we fully agree that many improvements can be achieved by means of organizational
change, we also expect that well-organized disaster
response organizations can enhance their performance by making use of agent-based systems in specific areas where information fusion and action
coordination can become complex. To identify and
develop these areas, we advocate that concurrent work
is to be done that fosters both organizational change
and technological innovation. Projects combining
both perspectives will contribute to establishing credibility for agent-based decision support systems. c
REFERENCES
1. Fiedrich, F. An HLA-based multiagent system for optimized resource
allocation after strong earthquakes. In Proceedings of WSC 2006 (Monterey, 2006).
2. Jennings, N.R., Ramchurn, S.D., Dutta, P., Rogers, A., and Vetsikas,
I. The ALADDIN project: Agent technology to the rescue. In Proceedings of the 1st ATDM Workshop, (Hokadoke, Japan, 2006).
3. Kitano, H. and Tadokoro, S. RoboCup rescue: A grand challenge for
multiagent and intelligent systems. AI Magazine 22, 1 (2001), 3952.
4. Tate, A. The helpful environment: Geographically dispersed intelligent agents that collaborate. IEEE Intelligent Systems 21, 3 (2006),
5761.
5. Van Veelen, B., Storms, P., and van Aart, C. Effective and efficient
coordination strategies for agile crisis response organizations. In Proceedings of ISCRAM 2006, (New Jersey, 2006).

Frank Fiedrich (fiedrich@gwu.edu) is an assistant professor of
Engineering Management and Systems Engineering at the Institute for
Crisis, Disaster and Risk Management at The George Washington
University.
Paul Burghardt (paul.burghardt@decis.nl) is a research manager
at the Delft Consortium on Intelligent Systems (DECIS Lab) in the
Netherlands.

 2007 ACM 0001-0782/07/0300 $5.00

