Engineering Applications of Articial Intelligence 16 (2003) 7590

Articial intelligence for management and control of pollution
minimization and mitigation processes
Christine W. Chana,*, Guo H. Huangb
b

a
Department of Computer Science, University of Regina, Regina, Sask., Canada S4S 0A2
Environmental Systems Engineering Program, Faculty of Engineering, University of Regina, Regina, Sask., Canada S4S 0A2

Abstract
The reduction of environmental pollution and the conservation and recycling of natural resources are signicant social and
environmental concerns. As valuable means for pollution control, minimization and mitigation remain attractive approaches.
However, interactive, dynamic and uncertain features are associated with these processes, resulting in difculties in their
management and control. Articial intelligence (AI) is an effective approach for tackling these complexities. In this study, the recent
advancements of AI-based technologies for management and control of pollution minimization and mitigation processes are
examined. Literature relevant to the area of application of AI to control and management of pollution minimization and mitigation
processes is investigated. Especially, technologies of expert systems, fuzzy logic, and neural networks, which emerge as the most
frequently employed approaches for realizing process control, are highlighted. The results not only provide an overview of the
updated progress in the study eld but also, more importantly, reveal perspectives of research for more effective environmental
process control through the AI-aided measures. Several demanding areas for enhanced research efforts are discussed, including
issues of data availability and reliability, methodology validity, and system complexity.
r 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Articial intelligence; Environment; Expert systems; Fuzzy logic; Mitigation; Minimization; Neural networks; Process control

1. Introduction
Most of environmental engineering problems are
related to a number of factors with multi-source,
multi-layer, multi-stage, and multi-objective characteristics. Effective reection of these complexities is
currently an important issue emphasized by many
public-sector decision-makers and private industries
for sound management and control of pollution minimization and mitigation processes. Previously, many
modeling tools have been developed for simulating
processes in water/wastewater treatment plants, solid
waste incinerators and air pollution control facilities.
However, the uncertain, interactive and dynamic features of these processes often lead to difculties in
obtaining desired system performance. Integrated consideration that incorporates a number of uncertain and
dynamic components in the study systems within a
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-306-585-5225; fax: +1-306-5854745.
E-mail address: christine.chan@uregina.ca (C.W. Chan).
0952-1976/03/$ - see front matter r 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0952-1976(03)00062-9

general framework rather than examining them in
isolation is needed for potential improvement (Rynk,
1992).
Articial intelligence (AI) is an effective approach for
tackling the above complexities. For example, the
complicated interrelationships among a number of
system factors and activities can be explicated through
the process of knowledge acquisition. Also, the gap
between result generated from detailed modeling efforts
and applicability of that result to a practical situation
can be lled by building an automated system, allowing
incorporation of implicit, and often qualitative considerations deemed crucial by engineers and/or operators. A knowledge-based system can perform trade-off
analysis to compare the costs/benets of economic
versus environmental concerns. Besides, the modeling
result usually does not satisfactorily address specic
issues concerning impacts of a control action. An
automated system can investigate the key variables in
greater detail and provide more insight into the specic
implications of a generalized solution. For effective realtime control, an expert system can provide more insight

76

C.W. Chan, G.H. Huang / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 7590

into the specic implications of a generalized solution
and can complement or rene a simulation program
(Liang, 2001).
Recently, some applications of AI to real-time control
of pollution minimization and mitigation processes have
been reported. They demonstrate an emerging area for
more extensive studies. The objective of this paper is to
examine the recent advancements of AI-based technologies for management and control of pollution minimization and mitigation processes. Literature relevant
to the area of application of AI to control and
management of pollution minimization and mitigation
processes will be investigated. Especially, technologies of
expert systems, fuzzy logic, and neural networks, which
emerge as the most frequently employed approaches
underlying AI for realizing process control, will be
highlighted.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides
an overview of the related technologies for environmental process control. This is followed by a review of
works on the development of expert systems and
decision support systems that are critical to process
control. Section 4 describes neural networks and their
applications to the area of pollution minimization and
mitigation; and Section 5 presents works that adopt a
hybrid approach to system development and integrate
expert systems, neural networks, and fuzzy logic.
Section 6 concludes this review study.

2. Overview of AI-based technologies for environmental
process control
Application of AI for controlling an environmental
process involves a number of subprocesses that need to
be managed or automated. For example, in a pollution
mitigationplant environment, there are several levels at
which to address the problem of management and
control. At the lowest level, there are instruments that
monitor, sense, and manipulate process variables. The
instruments are often connected to a control structure
that is capable of implementing a control law. The next
level is the supervisory host computer that is usually
connected to some control hardware by network
communications. The supervisory host computer maintains the applications that are one level above the
primary control functions such as the database. The
supervisory host computer may in turn be connected to
a plant-wide and then the corporate-wide computer
systems (Rynk, 1992).
In the most general terms, AI is the use of computers
to emulate the reasoning and decision-making processes
of humans (Walker, 1993). There are many opportunities for applying AI and expert systems into process
control and management. These opportunities are most
often realized by implementing functionality on the

supervisory host computer, and can include applications
such as computer-aided instruction and training, maintenance, conguration, plant planning and optimization, scheduling, alarm management, and operator
decision support (Stock, 1989). Most studies on
application of AI to the process industries involve the
technologies of expert systems, fuzzy logic, and neural
networks.
Expert systems can emulate human problem solving
by representing the expertise in its knowledge base. An
expert system usually consists of three major components: a knowledge base, an inference engine, and a
working memory. The knowledge base contains facts
and heuristics associated with the application domain.
The inference engine searches the knowledge base for
applicable rules, and applies the rules for solving the
problem. The working memory is the repository to store
the new information generated as the inference engine
searches and selects rules. In addition to the three
components, an expert system typically contains other
components such as a user interface and explanation
facility.
Fuzzy logic has emerged as an alternative to classical
or binary valued logic in application areas ranging from
industrial process control to consumer products to
aerospace and bioengineering (Langari and Yen,
1995). The role that fuzzy logic plays in the diverse
applications is to bridge the gap between symbolic
processing and numerical computation in shaping a
suitable rule-based and linguistic control strategy. In
bridging the gap, fuzzy logic has expanded the domain
of application of control engineering to those that have
traditionally fallen outside its realm if a strictly binary
valued logic has been applied. Hence, fuzzy logic forms
the basis for implementation of control strategies in the
wide sense to enable decision-making or supervisory
control. The major distinctions between fuzzy logic
and expert systems are the use of linguistic rather
than numeric variables, and the use of fuzzy conditional
statements rather than exact expressions. Rules that
incorporate linguistic and inexact data can be manipulated as a useful tool for reasoning about difcult
process management and control situations (Walker,
1993).
Neural networks are a computational paradigm
modeled on the human brain. The three important
similarities to the brains capabilities are the ability to
lter out essential data from a larger set of data
containing irrelevant information, the ability to learn
from experience, and the ability to generalize from
previous experience to predict new outcomes (Walker,
1993). An articial neural network (ANN) model is
made of input and output connections, which simulates
the human mental processes. This paradigm has become
increasingly popular for two main reasons. Neural
networks are inherently parallel machines. They can be

