million in 2017. Half of those deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa, and another 30 per cent in Southern Asia. Yet stark disparities persist across regions and countries. How much will it cost to achieve these targets? Ensuring healthy lives for all requires a strong commitment, but the benefits outweigh the cost. Healthy people are the foundation for healthy economies. For example, if we spent $1 billion in expanding immunization coverage against influenza, pneumonia and other preventable diseases, we could save 1 million childrens lives each year. In the past decade, improvements in health and heath care led to a 24 per cent increase in income growth in some of the poorest countries. The cost of inaction is greatermillions of children will continue to die from preventable diseases, women will die in pregnancy and childbirth, and health care costs will continue to plunge millions of people into poverty. Noncommunicable diseases alone will cost low- and middle-income countries more than $7 trillion in the next 15 years. What can I do to help? You can start by promoting and protecting your own health and the health of those around you, by making well-informed choices, practicing safe sex and vaccinating your children. You can raise awareness in your community about the importance of good health, healthy lifestyles as well as peoples right to quality health care services, especially for the most vulnerable such as women and children. You can also hold your government, local leaders and other decisionmakers accountable to their commitments to improve peoples access to health and health care. Major progress has been made in improving the health of millions of people, increasing life expectancy, reducing maternal and child mortality and fighting against leading communicable diseases. However, progress has stalled or is not happening fast enough with regard to addressing major diseases, such as malaria and tuberculosis, while at least half the global population does not have access to essential health services and many of those who do suffer undue financial hardship, potentially pushing them into extreme poverty. Concerted efforts are required to achieve universal health coverage and sustainable financing for health, to address the growing burden of non-communicable diseases, including mental health, and to tackle antimicrobial resistance and determinants of health such as air pollution and inadequate water and sanitation. Reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health. An estimated 303,000 women around the world died due to complications of pregnancy and childbirth in 2015. Almost all of these