industrializations job multiplication effect has a positive impact on society.  every job in manufacturing creates 2.2 jobs in other sectors. small and medium sized enterprises that engage in industrial processing and manufacturing are the most critical for the early stages of industrialization and are typically the largest job creators. they make up over 90 per cent of business worldwide and account for between 50 60 per cent of employment. least developed countries have immense potential for industrialization in food and beverages (agro industry), and textiles and garments, with good prospects for sustained employment generation and higher productivity. middle income countries can benefit from entering the basic and fabricated metals industries, which offer a range of products facing rapidly growing international demand. in developing countries, barely 30 per cent of agricultural production undergoes industrial processing. in high income countries, 98 per cent is processed. this suggests that there are great opportunities for developing countries in agribusiness. develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human well being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all. promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industrys share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries. increase the access of small scale industrial and other enterprises, in particular in developing countries, to financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets. by 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities. 