By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment. Number of parties to international multilateral environmental agreements on hazardous waste, and other chemicals that meet their commitments and obligations in transmitting information as required by each relevant agreement. Hazardous waste generated per capita and proportion of hazardous waste treated, by type of treatment. By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse. National recycling rate, tons of material recycled. Encourage companies, especially large and transnational companies, to adopt sustainable practices and to integrate sustainability information into their reporting cycle. Number of companies publishing sustainability reports. Promote public procurement practices that are sustainable, in accordance with national policies and priorities. Number of countries implementing sustainable public procurement policies and action plans. By 2030, ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature. Extent to which (i) global citizenship education and (ii) education for sustainable development (including climate change education) are mainstreamed in (a) national education policies; (b) curricula; (c) teacher education; and (d) student assessment. Support developing countries to strengthen their scientific and technological capacity to move towards more sustainable patterns of consumption and production. Amount of support to developing countries on research and development for sustainable consumption and production and environmentally sound technologies. Develop and implement tools to monitor sustainable development impacts for sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products. 