Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making at all levels. Proportions of positions (by sex, age, persons with disabilities and population groups) in public institutions (national and local legislatures, public service, and judiciary) compared to national distributions. Proportion of population who believe decision-making is inclusive and responsive, by sex, age, disability and population group. Broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries in the institutions of global governance. Proportion of members and voting rights of developing countries in international organizations. By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration. Proportion of children under 5 years of age whose births have been registered with a civil authority, by age. Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and international agreements. Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention and torture of journalists, associated media personnel, trade unionists and human rights advocates in the previous 12 months. Number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information. Strengthen relevant national institutions, including through international cooperation, for building capacity at all levels, in particular in developing countries, to prevent violence and combat terrorism and crime. Existence of independent national human rights institutions in compliance with the Paris Principles. Promote and enforce non-discriminatory laws and policies for sustainable development. Proportion of population reporting having personally felt discriminated against or harassed in the previous 12 months on the basis of a ground of discrimination prohibited under international human rights law. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. 