setting a target to provide at least 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to least developed countries. Net official development assistance, total and to least developed countries, as a proportion of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee donors gross national income (GNI). Mobilize additional financial resources for developing countries from multiple sources. Foreign direct investments (FDI), official development assistance and South-South Cooperation as a proportion of total domestic budget. Volume of remittances (in United States dollars) as a proportion of total GDP. Assist developing countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability through coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt restructuring, as appropriate, and address the external debt of highly indebted poor countries to reduce debt distress. Debt service as a proportion of exports of goods and services. Adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for least developed countries. Number of countries that adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for least developed countries. Enhance North-South, South-South and triangular regional and international cooperation on and access to science, technology and innovation and enhance knowledge sharing on mutually agreed terms, including through improved coordination among existing mechanisms, in particular at the United Nations level, and through a global technology facilitation mechanism. Number of science and/or technology cooperation agreements and programmes between countries, by type of cooperation. Fixed Internet broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, by speed. Promote the development, transfer, dissemination and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed. Total amount of approved funding for developing countries to promote the development, transfer, dissemination and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies. Fully operationalize the technology bank and science, technology and innovation capacity-building mechanism for least developed countries by 2017 and enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology. Proportion of individuals using the Internet. Enhance international