How much progress have we made? Support for implementing the SDGs is gaining momentum, but major challenges remain. A growing share of the global population has access to the Internet, and a Technology Bank for Least Developed Countries has been established, yet the digital divide persists. As partners, what would we need to do to achieve the Agenda? We will need to mobilize both existing and additional resources, technology development, financial resources, capacity building, and developed countries will need to fulfill their official development assistance commitments. Multistakeholder partnerships will be crucial to leverage the inter-linkages between the Sustainable Development Goals to enhance their effectiveness and impact and accelerate progress in achieving the Goals. How can we ensure the resources needed are effectively mobilized and monitored? This will be primarily the responsibility of countries. Reviews of progress will need to be undertaken regularly in each country, involving civil society, business and representatives of various interest groups. At the regional level, countries will share experiences and tackle common issues, while on an annual basis, at the United Nations, the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF), they will take stock of progress at the global level, identifying gaps and emerging issues, and recommending corrective action. What can we do to help? Join create a group in your local community that seeks to mobilize action on the implementation of the SDGs. Encourage your governments to partner with businesses for the implementation of the SDGs. Register your initiatives on the SDGs Partnerships Platform to inform, educate, network, and be inspired! Progress on some means of implementation targets is moving rapidly: personal remittances are at an all-time high, an increasing proportion of the global population has access to the Internet and the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries has been established. Yet, significant challenges remain: ODA is declining, private investment flows are not well aligned with sustainable