Big Datas Disparate Impact
Solon Barocas* & Andrew D. Selbst**
Advocates of algorithmic techniques like data mining argue that
these techniques eliminate human biases from the decision-making
process. But an algorithm is only as good as the data it works with.
Data is frequently imperfect in ways that allow these algorithms to
inherit the prejudices of prior decision makers. In other cases, data
may simply reflect the widespread biases that persist in society at
large. In still others, data mining can discover surprisingly useful
regularities that are really just preexisting patterns of exclusion and
inequality. Unthinking reliance on data mining can deny historically
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups full participation in society.
Worse still, because the resulting discrimination is almost always an
unintentional emergent property of the algorithms use rather than a
conscious choice by its programmers, it can be unusually hard to
identify the source of the problem or to explain it to a court.
This Essay examines these concerns through the lens of
American antidiscrimination lawmore particularly, through Title

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15779/Z38BG31
California Law Review, Inc. (CLR) is a California nonprofit corporation. CLR and the
authors are solely responsible for the content of their publications.
* Postdoctoral Research Associate, Center for Information Technology Policy, Princeton
University; Ph.D. 2014, New York University, Department of Media, Culture, and Communication.
This research was supported in part by the Center for Information Technology Policy at Princeton
University.
** Scholar in Residence, Electronic Privacy Information Center; Visiting Researcher,
Georgetown University Law Center; Visiting Fellow, Yale Information Society Project; J.D. 2011,
University of Michigan Law School. The authors would like to thank Jane Bambauer, Alvaro Bedoya,
Marjory Blumenthal, Danielle Citron, James Grimmelmann, Moritz Hardt, Don Herzog, Janine Hiller,
Chris Hoofnagle, Joanna Huey, Patrick Ishizuka, Michael Kirkpatrick, Aaron Konopasky, Joshua
Kroll, Mark MacCarthy, Arvind Narayanan, Helen Norton, Paul Ohm, Scott Peppet, Joel Reidenberg,
David Robinson, Kathy Strandburg, David Vladeck, members of the Privacy Research Group at New
York University, and the participants of the 2014 Privacy Law Scholars Conference for their helpful
comments. Special thanks also to Helen Nissenbaum and the Information Law Institute at New York
University for giving us an interdisciplinary space to share ideas, allowing this paper to come about.
Copyright  2016 by Solon Barocas and Andrew Selbst. This Essay is available for reuse under the
Creative
Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0
International
License,
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/. The required attribution notice under the license must
include the articles full citation information, e.g., Solon Barocas & Andrew D. Selbst, Big Data's
Disparate Impact, 104 CALIF. L. REV. 671 (2016).

671

672

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

VIIs prohibition of discrimination in employment. In the absence of
a demonstrable intent to discriminate, the best doctrinal hope for
data minings victims would seem to lie in disparate impact doctrine.
Case law and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commissions
Uniform Guidelines, though, hold that a practice can be justified as a
business necessity when its outcomes are predictive of future
employment outcomes, and data mining is specifically designed to
find such statistical correlations. Unless there is a reasonably
practical way to demonstrate that these discoveries are spurious,
Title VII would appear to bless its use, even though the correlations it
discovers will often reflect historic patterns of prejudice, others
discrimination against members of protected groups, or flaws in the
underlying data.
Addressing the sources of this unintentional discrimination and
remedying the corresponding deficiencies in the law will be difficult
technically, difficult legally, and difficult politically. There are a
number of practical limits to what can be accomplished
computationally. For example, when discrimination occurs because
the data being mined is itself a result of past intentional
discrimination, there is frequently no obvious method to adjust
historical data to rid it of this taint. Corrective measures that alter
the results of the data mining after it is complete would tread on
legally and politically disputed terrain. These challenges for reform
throw into stark relief the tension between the two major theories
underlying
antidiscrimination
law:
anticlassification
and
antisubordination. Finding a solution to big datas disparate impact
will require more than best efforts to stamp out prejudice and bias; it
will require a wholesale reexamination of the meanings of
discrimination and fairness.
Introduction .................................................................................................... 673
I. How Data Mining Discriminates ................................................................. 677
A. Defining the Target Variable and Class Labels .................... 677
B. Training Data ............................................................................... 680
1. Labeling Examples ................................................................ 681
2. Data Collection ...................................................................... 684
C. Feature Selection ......................................................................... 688
D. Proxies ......................................................................................... 691
E. Masking ....................................................................................... 692
II. Title VII Liability for Discriminatory Data Mining ................................... 694
A. Disparate Treatment ..................................................................... 694
B. Disparate Impact .......................................................................... 701
C. Masking and Problems of Proof .................................................. 712
III. The Difficulty for Reforms ....................................................................... 714
A. Internal Difficulties ...................................................................... 715

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

673

1. Defining the Target Variable ................................................. 715
2. Training Data ......................................................................... 716
a. Labeling Examples.......................................................... 716
b. Data Collection ............................................................... 717
3. Feature Selection ................................................................... 719
4. Proxies ................................................................................... 720
B. External Difficulties ..................................................................... 723
Conclusion ...................................................................................................... 729

INTRODUCTION
Big Data is the buzzword of the decade.1 Advertisers want data to reach
profitable consumers,2 medical professionals to find side effects of prescription
drugs,3 supply-chain operators to optimize their delivery routes,4 police to
determine where to focus resources,5 and social scientists to study human
interactions.6 Though useful, however, data is not a panacea. Where data is
used predictively to assist decision making, it can affect the fortunes of whole
classes of people in consistently unfavorable ways. Sorting and selecting for
the best or most profitable candidates means generating a model with winners
and losers. If data miners are not careful, the process can result in
disproportionately adverse outcomes concentrated within historically
disadvantaged groups in ways that look a lot like discrimination.
Although we live in the postcivil rights era, discrimination persists in
American society and is stubbornly pervasive in employment, housing, credit,
and consumer markets.7 While discrimination certainly endures in part due to
decision makers prejudices, a great deal of modern-day inequality can be
attributed to what sociologists call institutional discrimination.8 Unconscious,
implicit biases and inertia within societys institutions, rather than intentional

1. Contra Sanjeev Sardana, Big Data: Its Not a Buzzword, Its a Movement, FORBES (Nov.
20, 2013), http://www.forbes.com/sites/sanjeevsardana/2013/11/20/bigdata [https://perma.cc/9Y37ZFT5].
2. Tanzina Vega, New Ways Marketers Are Manipulating Data to Influence You, N.Y.
TIMES: BITS (June 19, 2013, 9:49 PM), http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/19/new-waysmarketers-are-manipulating-data-to-influence-you [https://perma.cc/238F-9T8X].
3. Nell Greenfieldboyce, Big Data Peeps at Your Medical Records to Find Drug Problems,
NPR (July 21, 2014, 5:15 AM), http://www.npr.org/blogs/health/2014/07/21/332290342/big-datapeeps-at-your-medical-records-to-find-drug-problems [https://perma.cc/GMT4-ECBD].
4. Business
by
Numbers,
ECONOMIST
(Sept.
13,
2007),
http://www.economist.com/node/9795140 [https://perma.cc/7YC2-DMYA].
5. Nadya Labi, Misfortune Teller, ATLANTIC (Jan.Feb. 2012), http://www.theatlantic.com/
magazine/archive/2012/01/misfortune-teller/308846 [https://perma.cc/7L72-J5L9].
6. David Lazer et al., Computational Social Science, 323 SCI. 721, 722 (2009).
7. Devah Pager & Hana Shepherd, The Sociology of Discrimination: Racial Discrimination
in Employment, Housing, Credit, and Consumer Markets, 34 ANN. REV. SOC. 181, 182 (2008).
8. Id.

674

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

choices, account for a large part of the disparate effects observed.9 Approached
without care, data mining can reproduce existing patterns of discrimination,
inherit the prejudice of prior decision makers, or simply reflect the widespread
biases that persist in society. It can even have the perverse result of
exacerbating existing inequalities by suggesting that historically disadvantaged
groups actually deserve less favorable treatment.
Algorithms10 could exhibit these tendencies even if they have not been
manually programmed to do so, whether on purpose or by accident.
Discrimination may be an artifact of the data mining process itself, rather than
a result of programmers assigning certain factors inappropriate weight. Such a
possibility has gone unrecognized by most scholars and policy makers, who
tend to fear concealed, nefarious intentions or the overlooked effects of human
bias or error in hand coding algorithms.11 Because the discrimination at issue is
unintentional, even honest attempts to certify the absence of prejudice on the
part of those involved in the data mining process may wrongly confer the
imprimatur of impartiality on the resulting decisions. Furthermore, because the
mechanism through which data mining may disadvantage protected classes is
less obvious in cases of unintentional discrimination, the injustice may be
harder to identify and address.
In May 2014, the White House released a report titled Big Data: Seizing
Opportunities, Preserving Values (Podesta Report), which hinted at the
discriminatory potential of big data.12 The report finds that big data analytics
have the potential to eclipse longstanding civil rights protections in how
personal information is used in housing, credit, employment, health, education,
and the marketplace.13 It suggests that there may be unintended discriminatory

9. See Andrew Grant-Thomas & john a. powell, Toward a Structural Racism Framework, 15
POVERTY & RACE 3, 4 (Institutional racism was the designation given in the late 1960s to the
recognition that, at very least, racism need not be individualist, essentialist or intentional.).
10. An algorithm is a formally specified sequence of logical operations that provides stepby-step instructions for computers to act on data and thus automate decisions. SOLON BAROCAS ET
AL., DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: TECHNOLOGY PRIMER (2014), http://www.datacivilrights.org/pubs/20141030/Technology.pdf [https://perma.cc/X3YX-XHNA]. Algorithms play a role in both automating the
discovery of useful patterns in datasets and automating decision making that relies on these
discoveries. This Essay uses the term to refer to the latter.
11. See, e.g., Kate Crawford & Jason Schultz, Big Data and Due Process: Toward a
Framework to Redress Predictive Privacy Harms, 55 B.C. L. REV. 93, 101 (2014) ([H]ousing
providers could design an algorithm to predict the [race, gender, or religion] of potential buyers or
renters and advertise the properties only to those who [meet certain] profiles.); Danielle Keats Citron
& Frank Pasquale, The Scored Society: Due Process for Automated Predictions, 89 WASH. L. REV. 1,
4 (2014) (Because human beings program predictive algorithms, their biases and values are
embedded into the softwares instructions. . . .); Danielle Keats Citron, Technological Due Process,
85 WASH. U. L. REV. 1249, 1254 (2008) (Programmers routinely change the substance of rules when
translating them from human language into computer code.).
12. EXEC. OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG DATA: SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES, PRESERVING
VALUES (May 2014), http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/big_data_privacy_report
_5.1.14_final_print.pdf [https://perma.cc/ZXB4-SDL9].
13. Id. (introductory letter).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

675

effects from data mining but does not detail how they might come about.14
Because the origin of the discriminatory effects remains unexplored, the
reports approach does not address the full scope of the problem.
The Podesta Report, as one might expect from the executive branch, seeks
to address these effects primarily by finding new ways to enforce existing law.
Regarding discrimination, the report primarily recommends that enforcement
agencies, such as the Department of Justice, Federal Trade Commission,
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC), increase their technical expertise and develop a plan for
investigating and resolving violations of law in such cases.15
As this Essay demonstrates, however, existing law largely fails to address
the discrimination that can result from data mining. The argument is grounded
in Title VII because, of all American antidiscrimination jurisprudence, Title
VII has a particularly well-developed set of case law and scholarship. Further,
there exists a rapidly emerging field of work-force science,16 for which Title
VII will be the primary vehicle for regulation. Under Title VII, it turns out that
some, if not most, instances of discriminatory data mining will not generate
liability. While the Essay does not show this to be true outside of Title VII
itself, the problem is likely not particular to Title VII. Rather, it is a feature of
our current approach to antidiscrimination jurisprudence, with its focus on
procedural fairness. The analysis will likely apply to other traditional areas of
discrimination, such as housing or disability discrimination. Similar tendencies
to disadvantage the disadvantaged will likely arise in areas that regulate
legitimate economic discrimination, such as credit and insurance.
This Essay proceeds in three Parts. Part I introduces the computer science
literature and proceeds through the various steps of solving a problem with data
mining: defining the target variable, labeling and collecting the training data,
using feature selection, and making decisions on the basis of the resulting
model. Each of these steps creates possibilities for a final result that has a
disproportionately adverse impact on protected classes, whether by specifying
the problem to be solved in ways that affect classes differently, failing to
recognize or address statistical biases, reproducing past prejudice, or
considering an insufficiently rich set of factors. Even in situations where data
miners are extremely careful, they can still effect discriminatory results with
models that, quite unintentionally, pick out proxy variables for protected
classes. Finally, Part I notes that data mining poses the additional problem of

14. Id. at 64 (This combination of circumstances and technology raises difficult questions
about how to ensure that discriminatory effects resulting from automated decision processes, whether
intended or not, can be detected, measured, and redressed.).
15. Id. at 65.
16. Steve Lohr, Big Data, Trying to Build Better Workers, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 20, 2013),
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/21/technology/big-data-trying-to-build-better-workers.html
[https://perma.cc/CEL2-P9XB].

676

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

giving data miners the ability to disguise intentional discrimination as
accidental.
In Part II, the Essay reviews Title VII jurisprudence as it applies to data
mining. Part II discusses both disparate treatment and disparate impact,
examining which of the various data mining mechanisms identified in Part I
will trigger liability under either Title VII theory. At first blush, either theory is
viable. Disparate treatment is viable because data mining systems treat
everyone differently; that is their purpose. Disparate impact is also viable
because data mining can have various discriminatory effects, even without
intent. But as Part II demonstrates, data mining combines some well-known
problems in discrimination doctrines with new challenges particular to data
mining systems, such that liability for discriminatory data mining will be hard
to find. Part II concludes with a discussion of the new problems of proof that
arise for intentional discrimination in this context.
Finally, Part III addresses the difficulties reformers would face in
addressing the deficiencies found in Part II. These difficulties take two forms:
complications internal to the logic of data mining and political and
constitutional difficulties external to the problem. Internally, the different steps
in a data mining problem require constant subjective and fact-bound
judgments, which do not lend themselves to general legislative resolution.
Worse, many of these are normative judgments in disguise, about which there
is not likely to be consensus. Externally, data mining will force society to
explicitly rebalance the two justifications for antidiscrimination lawrooting
out intentional discrimination and equalizing the status of historically
disadvantaged communities. This is because methods of proof and corrective
measures will often require an explicit commitment to substantive remediation
rather than merely procedural remedies. In certain cases, data mining will make
it simply impossible to rectify discriminatory results without engaging with the
question of what level of substantive inequality is proper or acceptable in a
given context. Given current political realities and trends in constitutional
doctrines, legislation enacting a remedy that results from these discussions
faces an uphill battle. To be sure, data mining also has the potential to help
reduce discrimination by forcing decisions onto a more reliable empirical
foundation and by formalizing decision-making processes, thus limiting the
opportunity for individual bias to affect important assessments.17 In many
situations, the introduction of data mining will be a boon to civil rights, even
where it fails to root out discrimination altogether, and such efforts should be
encouraged. Yet, understanding when and why discrimination persists in cases
of data-driven decision making reveals important and sometimes troubling
limits to the promise of big data, for which there are no ready solutions.

17. Tal Z. Zarsky, Automated Prediction: Perception, Law, and Policy, COMM. ACM,
Sept. 2012, at 3335.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

677

I.
HOW DATA MINING DISCRIMINATES
Although commentators have ascribed myriad forms of discrimination to
data mining,18 there remains significant confusion over the precise mechanisms
that render data mining discriminatory. This Part develops a taxonomy that
isolates and explicates the specific technical issues that can give rise to models
whose use in decision making may have a disproportionately adverse impact on
protected classes. By definition, data mining is always a form of statistical (and
therefore seemingly rational) discrimination. Indeed, the very point of data
mining is to provide a rational basis upon which to distinguish between
individuals and to reliably confer to the individual the qualities possessed by
those who seem statistically similar. Nevertheless, data mining holds the
potential to unduly discount members of legally protected classes and to place
them at systematic relative disadvantage. Unlike more subjective forms of
decision making, data minings ill effects are often not traceable to human bias,
conscious or unconscious. This Part describes five mechanisms by which these
disproportionately adverse outcomes might occur, walking through a sequence
of key steps in the overall data mining process.
A. Defining the Target Variable and Class Labels
In contrast to those traditional forms of data analysis that simply return
records or summary statistics in response to a specific query, data mining
attempts to locate statistical relationships in a dataset.19 In particular, it
automates the process of discovering useful patterns, revealing regularities
upon which subsequent decision making can rely. The accumulated set of
discovered relationships is commonly called a model, and these models can
be employed to automate the process of classifying entities or activities of
interest, estimating the value of unobserved variables, or predicting future
outcomes.20 Familiar examples of such applications include spam or fraud
detection, credit scoring, and insurance pricing. These examples all involve
attempts to determine the status or likely outcome of cases under consideration
based solely on access to correlated data.21 Data mining helps identify cases of

18. Solon Barocas, Data Mining and the Discourse on Discrimination, PROC. DATA ETHICS
WORKSHOP (2014), https://dataethics.github.io/proceedings/DataMiningandtheDiscourseOn
Discrimination.pdf [https://perma.cc/D3LT-GS2X].
19. See generally Usama Fayyad, The Digital Physics of Data Mining, 44 COMM. ACM, Mar.
2001, at 62.
20. More formally, classification deals with discrete outcomes, estimation deals with
continuous variables, and prediction deals with both discrete outcomes and continuous variables, but
specifically for states or values in the future. MICHAEL J. A. BERRY & GORDON S. LINOFF, DATA
MINING TECHNIQUES: FOR MARKETING, SALES, AND CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT 8
11 (2004).
21. Pedro Domingos, A Few Useful Things to Know About Machine Learning, COMM. ACM,
Oct. 2012, at 7880.

678

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

spam and fraud and anticipate default and poor health by treating these states
and outcomes as a function of some other set of observed characteristics.22 In
particular, by exposing so-called machine learning algorithms to examples of
the cases of interest (previously identified instances of fraud, spam, default, and
poor health), the algorithm learns which related attributes or activities can
serve as potential proxies for those qualities or outcomes of interest.23
Two concepts from the machine learning and data mining literature are
important here: target variables and class labels. The outcomes of interest
discussed above are known as target variables.24 While the target variable
defines what data miners are looking for, class labels divide all possible
values of the target variable into mutually exclusive categories.
The proper specification of the target variable is frequently not obvious,
and the data miners task is to define it. To start, data miners must translate
some amorphous problem into a question that can be expressed in more formal
terms that computers can parse. In particular, data miners must determine how
to solve the problem at hand by translating it into a question about the value of
some target variable. The open-endedness that characterizes this part of the
process is often described as the art of data mining. This initial step requires
a data miner to understand[] the project objectives and requirements from a
business perspective [and] then convert[] this knowledge into a data mining
problem definition.25 Through this necessarily subjective process of
translation, data miners may unintentionally parse the problem in such a way
that happens to systematically disadvantage protected classes.
Problem specification is not a wholly arbitrary process, however. Data
mining can only address problems that lend themselves to formalization as
questions about the state or value of the target variable. Data mining works
exceedingly well for dealing with fraud and spam because these cases rely on
extant, binary categories. A given instance either is or is not fraud or spam, and
the definitions of fraud or spam are, for the most part, uncontroversial.26 A
computer can then flag or refuse transactions or redirect emails according to

22.
23.
24.

Id.
Id.
COMM. ON THE ANALYSIS OF MASSIVE DATA ET AL., FRONTIERS IN MASSIVE DATA
ANALYSIS 101 (2013), http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=18374 [https://perma.cc/5DNQUFE4]. The machine learning community refers to classification, estimation, and predictionthe
techniques that we discuss in this Essayas supervised learning because analysts must actively
specify a target variable of interest. Id. at 104. Other techniques known as unsupervised learning do
not require any such target variables and instead search for general structures in the dataset, rather than
patterns specifically related to some state or outcome. Id. at 102. Clustering is the most common
example of unsupervised learning, in that clustering algorithms simply reveal apparent hot spots
when plotting the data in some fashion. Id. We limit the discussion to supervised learning because we
are primarily concerned with the sorting, ranking, and predictions enabled by data mining.
25. PETE CHAPMAN ET AL., CRISP-DM 1.0: STEP-BY-STEP DATA MINING GUIDE 10 (2000).
26. See David J. Hand, Classifier Technology and the Illusion of Progress, 21 STAT. SCI. 1, 10
(2006).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

679

well-understood distinctions.27 In these cases, data miners can simply rely on
these simple, preexisting categories to define the class labels.
Sometimes, though, defining the target variable involves the creation of
new classes. Consider credit scoring, for instance. Although now taken for
granted, the predicted likelihood of missing a certain number of loan
repayments is not a self-evident answer to the question of how to successfully
extend credit to consumers.28 Unlike fraud or spam, creditworthiness is an
artifact of the problem definition itself. There is no way to directly measure
creditworthiness because the very notion of creditworthiness is a function of
the particular way the credit industry has constructed the credit issuing and
repayment system. That is, an individuals ability to repay some minimum
amount of an outstanding debt on a monthly basis is taken to be a nonarbitrary
standard by which to determine in advance and all-at-once whether he is
worthy of credit.29
Data mining has many uses beyond spam detection, fraud detection, credit
scoring, and insurance pricing. As discussed in the introduction, this Essay will
focus on the use of data mining in employment decisions. Extending this
discussion to employment, then, where employers turn to data mining to
develop ways of improving and automating their search for good employees,
they face a number of crucial choices.
Like creditworthiness, the definition of a good employee is not a given.
Good must be defined in ways that correspond to measurable outcomes:
relatively higher sales, shorter production time, or longer tenure, for example.
When employers mine data for good employees, they are, in fact, looking for
employees whose observable characteristics suggest that they would meet or
exceed some monthly sales threshold, perform some task in less than a certain
amount of time, or remain in their positions for more than a set number of
weeks or months. Rather than drawing categorical distinctions along these
lines, data mining could also estimate or predict the specific numerical value of
sales, production time, or tenure period, enabling employers to rank rather than
simply sort employees.
These may seem like eminently reasonable things for employers to want
to predict, but they are, by necessity, only part of an array of possible
definitions of good. An employer may instead attempt to define the target
variable in a more holistic wayby, for example, relying on the grades that
prior employees have received in annual reviews, which are supposed to reflect

27. Though described as a matter of detection, this is really a classification task, where any
given transaction or email can belong to one of two possible classes, respectively: fraud or not fraud,
or spam or not spam.
28. See generally Martha Ann Poon, What Lenders SeeA History of the Fair Isaac
Scorecard, (2013) (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, San Diego),
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1520318884 [https://perma.cc/YD3S-B9N7].
29. Hand, supra note 26, at 10.

680

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

an overall assessment of performance. These target variable definitions simply
inherit the formalizations involved in preexisting assessment mechanisms,
which in the case of human-graded performance reviews, may be far less
consistent.30
Thus, the definition of the target variable and its associated class labels
will determine what data mining happens to find. While critics of data mining
have tended to focus on inaccurate classifications (false positives and false
negatives),31 as muchif not moredanger resides in the definition of the
class label itself and the subsequent labeling of examples from which rules are
inferred.32 While different choices for the target variable and class labels can
seem more or less reasonable, valid concerns with discrimination enter at this
stage because the different choices may have a greater or lesser adverse impact
on protected classes. For example, as later Parts will explain in detail, hiring
decisions made on the basis of predicted tenure are much more likely to have a
disparate impact on certain protected classes than hiring decisions that turn on
some estimate of worker productivity. If the turnover rate happens to be
systematically higher among members of certain protected classes, hiring
decisions based on predicted length of employment will result in fewer job
opportunities for members of these groups, even if they would have performed
as well as or better than the other applicants the company chooses to hire.
B. Training Data
As described above, data mining learns by example. Accordingly, what a
model learns depends on the examples to which it has been exposed. The data
that function as examples are known as training dataquite literally, the data
that train the model to behave in a certain way. The character of the training
data can have meaningful consequences for the lessons that data mining
happens to learn. As computer science scholars explain, biased training data
leads to discriminatory models.33 This can mean two rather different things,
30. Joseph M. Stauffer & M. Ronald Buckley, The Existence and Nature of Racial Bias in
Supervisory Ratings, 90 J. APPLIED PSYCHOL. 586, 58889 (2005) (showing evidence of racial bias in
performance evaluations). Nevertheless, devising new target variables can have the salutary effect of
forcing decision makers to think much more concretely about the outcomes that justifiably determine
whether someone is a good employee. The explicit enumeration demanded of data mining thus also
presents an opportunity to make decision making more consistent, more accountable, and fairer
overall. This, however, requires conscious effort and careful thinking, and is not a natural consequence
of adopting data mining.
31. Bruce Schneier, Data Mining for Terrorists, SCHNEIER ON SECURITY (Mar. 9, 2006),
https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2006/03/data_mining_for.html
[https://perma.cc/ZW44N2KR]; Oscar H. Gandy Jr., Engaging Rational Discrimination: Exploring Reasons for Placing
Regulatory Constraints on Decision Support Systems, 12 ETHICS & INFO. TECH. 29, 3940 (2010);
Mireille Hildebrandt & Bert-Jaap Koops, The Challenges of Ambient Law and Legal Protection in the
Profiling Era, 73 MOD. L. REV. 428, 43335 (2010).
32. See infra Part I.B.
33. Bart Custers, Data Dilemmas in the Information Society: Introduction and Overview, in
DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY 3, 20 (Bart Custers et al. eds., 2013).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

681

though: (1) if data mining treats cases in which prejudice has played some role
as valid examples to learn from, that rule may simply reproduce the prejudice
involved in these earlier cases; or (2) if data mining draws inferences from a
biased sample of the population, any decision that rests on these inferences
may systematically disadvantage those who are under- or overrepresented in
the dataset. Both can affect the training data in ways that lead to discrimination,
but the mechanismsimproper labeling of examples and biased data
collectionsare sufficiently distinct that they warrant separate treatment.
1. Labeling Examples
Labeling examples is the process by which the training data is manually
assigned class labels. In cases of fraud or spam, the data miners draw from
examples that come prelabeled: when individual customers report fraudulent
charges or mark a message as spam, they are actually labeling transactions and
email for the providers of credit and webmail. Likewise, an employer using
grades previously given at performance reviews is also using prelabeled
examples.
In certain cases, however, there may not be any labeled data and data
miners may have to figure out a way to label examples themselves. This can be
a laborious process, and it is frequently fraught with peril.34 Often the best
labels for different classifications will be open to debate. On which side of the
creditworthy line does someone who has missed four credit card payments fall,
for example?35 The answer is not obvious. Even where the class labels are
uncontested or uncontroversial, they may present a problem because analysts
will often face difficult choices in deciding which of the available labels best
applies to a particular example. Certain cases may present some, but not all,
criteria for inclusion in a particular class.36 The situation might also work in
reverse, where the class labels are insufficiently precise to capture meaningful
differences between cases. Such imperfect matches will demand that data
miners exercise judgment.
The unavoidably subjective labeling of examples will skew the resulting
findings such that any decisions taken on the basis of those findings will
characterize all future cases along the same lines. This is true even if such

34. Hand, supra note 26, at 1011.
35. Id. at 10 (The classical supervised classification paradigm also takes as fundamental the
fact that the classes are well defined. That is, that there is some fixed clear external criterion, which is
used to produce the class labels. In many situations, however, this is not the case. In particular, when
the classes are defined by thresholding a continuous variable, there is always the possibility that the
defining threshold might be changed. Once again, this situation arises in consumer credit, where it is
common to define a customer as defaulting if they fall three months in arrears with repayments. This
definition, however, is not a qualitative one (contrast has a tumor/does not have a tumor) but is very
much a quantitative one. It is entirely reasonable that alternative definitions (e.g., four months in
arrears) might be more useful if economic conditions were to change.).
36. Id. at 11.

682

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

characterizations would seem plainly erroneous to analysts who looked more
closely at the individual cases. For all their potential problems, though, the
labels applied to the training data must serve as ground truth.37 Thus, decisions
based on discoveries that rest on haphazardly labeled data or data labeled in a
systematically, though unintentionally, biased manner will seem valid
according to the customary validation methods employed by data miners. So
long as prior decisions affected by some form of prejudice serve as examples of
correctly rendered determinations, data mining will necessarily infer rules that
exhibit the same prejudice.
Consider a real-world example from a different context as to how biased
data labeling can skew results. St. Georges Hospital, in the United Kingdom,
developed a computer program to help sort medical school applicants based on
its previous admissions decisions.38 Those admissions decisions, it turns out,
had systematically disfavored racial minorities and women with credentials
otherwise equal to other applicants.39 In drawing rules from biased prior
decisions, St. Georges Hospital unknowingly devised an automated process
that possessed these very same prejudices. As editors at the British Medical
Journal noted at the time, [T]he program was not introducing new bias but
merely reflecting that already in the system.40 Were an employer to undertake
a similar plan to automate its hiring decisions by inferring a rule from past
decisions swayed by prejudice, the employer would likewise arrive at a
decision procedure that simply reproduces the prejudice of prior decision
makers. Indeed, automating the process in this way would turn the conscious
prejudice or implicit bias of individuals involved in previous decision making
into a formalized rule that would systematically alter the prospects of all future
applicants. For example, the computer may learn to discriminate against certain
female or black applicants if trained on prior hiring decisions in which an
employer has consistently rejected jobseekers with degrees from womens or
historically black colleges.
Not only can data mining inherit prior prejudice through the mislabeling
of examples, it can also reflect current prejudice through the ongoing behavior
of users taken as inputs to data mining. This is what Professor Latanya
Sweeney discovered in a study that found that Google queries for blacksounding names were more likely to return contextual (i.e., key-word triggered)

37. Id. at 12. Even when evaluating a model, the kinds of subtle mischaracterizations that
happen during training will be impossible to detect because most evaluation data is just a small
subset of the training data that has been withheld during the learning process. Any problems with the
training data will be present in the evaluation data.
38. Stella Lowry & Gordon Macpherson, A Blot on the Profession, 296 BRIT. MED. J. 657,
657 (1988).
39. Id. at 657.
40. Id.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

683

advertisements for arrest records than those for white-sounding names.41
Sweeney confirmed that the companies paying for these advertisements had not
set out to focus on black-sounding names; rather, the fact that black-sounding
names were more likely to trigger such advertisements seemed to be an artifact
of the algorithmic process that Google employs to determine which
advertisements to display alongside certain queries.42 Although it is not fully
known how Google computes the so-called quality score according to which
it ranks advertisers bids, one important factor is the predicted likelihood, based
on historical trends, that users will click on an advertisement.43 As Sweeney
points out, the process learns over time which [advertisement] text gets the
most clicks from viewers [of the advertisement] and promotes that
advertisement in its rankings accordingly.44 Sweeney posits that this aspect of
the process could result in the differential delivery of advertisements that
reflect the kinds of prejudice held by those exposed to the advertisements.45 In
attempting to cater to users preferences, Google will unintentionally reproduce
the existing prejudices that inform users choices.
A similar situation could conceivably arise on websites that recommend
potential employees to employers, as LinkedIn does through its Talent Match
feature.46 If LinkedIn determines which candidates to recommend based on the
demonstrated interest of employers in certain types of candidates, Talent Match
will offer recommendations that reflect whatever biases employers happen to
exhibit. In particular, if LinkedIns algorithm observes that employers disfavor
certain candidates who are members of a protected class, Talent Match may
decrease the rate at which it recommends these candidates to employers. The
recommendation engine would learn to cater to the prejudicial preferences of
employers.
There is an old adage in computer science: garbage in, garbage out.
Because data mining relies on training data as ground truth, when those inputs

41. Latanya Sweeney, Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery, COMM. ACM, May 2013, at 44,
47 (2013).
42. Id. at 48, 52.
43. Check
and
Understand
Quality
Score,
GOOGLE,
https://support.google.com/adwords/answer/2454010?hl=en [https://perma.cc/A88T-GF8X] (last
visited July 26, 2014).
44. Sweeney, supra note 41, at 52.
45. The fact that black people may be convicted of crimes at a higher rate than nonblack
people does not explain why those who search for black-sounding names would be any more likely to
click on advertisements that mention an arrest record than those who see the same exact advertisement
when they search for white-sounding names. If the advertisement implies, in both cases, that a person
of that particular name has an arrest record, as Sweeney shows, the only reason the advertisements
keyed to black-sounding names should receive greater attention is if searchers confer greater
significance to the fact of prior arrests when the person happens to be black. Id. at 53.
46. Dan Woods, LinkedIns Monica Rogati on What Is a Data Scientist?, FORBES (Nov. 27,
2011), http://www.forbes.com/sites/danwoods/2011/11/27/linkedins-monica-rogati-on-what-is-a-datascientist [https://perma.cc/N9HT-BXU3].

684

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

are themselves skewed by bias or inattention, the resulting system will produce
results that are at best unreliable and at worst discriminatory.
2. Data Collection
Decisions that depend on conclusions drawn from incorrect, partial, or
nonrepresentative data may discriminate against protected classes. The
individual records that a company maintains about a person might have serious
mistakes,47 the records of the entire protected class of which this person is a
member might also have similar mistakes at a higher rate than other groups,
and the entire set of records may fail to reflect members of protected classes in
accurate proportion to others.48 In other words, the quality and
representativeness of records might vary in ways that correlate with class
membership (e.g., institutions might maintain systematically less accurate,
precise, timely, and complete records for certain classes of people). Even a
dataset with individual records of consistently high quality can suffer from
statistical biases that fail to represent different groups in accurate proportions.
Much attention has focused on the harms that might befall individuals whose
records in various commercial databases are error ridden.49 Far less
consideration, however, has been paid to the systematic disadvantage that
members of protected classes may suffer from being miscounted and, as a
result, misrepresented in the evidence base.
Recent scholarship has begun to stress this point. Jonas Lerman, for
example, worries about the nonrandom, systemic omission of people who live
on big datas margins, whether due to poverty, geography, or lifestyle, and
whose lives are less datafied than the general populations.50 Professor Kate
Crawford has likewise warned that [b]ecause not all data is created or even
collected equally, there are signal problems in big-data setsdark zones or
shadows where some citizens and communities are overlooked or

47. Data quality is a topic of lively practical and philosophical debate. See, e.g., Luciano
Floridi, Information Quality, 26 PHIL. & TECH. 1 (2013); Richard Y. Wang & Diane M. Strong,
Beyond Accuracy: What Data Quality Means to Data Consumers, 12 J. MGMT. INFO. SYS. 5 (1996).
The components of data quality have been thought to include accuracy, precision, completeness,
consistency, validity, and timeliness, though this catalog of features is far from settled. See generally
LARRY P. ENGLISH, INFORMATION QUALITY APPLIED (2009).
48. Cf. Zeynep Tufekci, Big Questions for Social Media Big Data: Representativeness,
Validity and Other Methodological Pitfalls, EIGHTH INTL AAAI CONF. WEBLOGS & SOC. MEDIA
(2014),
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM14/paper/viewFile/8062/8151
[https://perma.cc/G4G7-2VZ8].
49. See, e.g., FED. TRADE COMMN, REPORT TO CONGRESS UNDER SECTION 319 OF THE FAIR
AND ACCURATE CREDIT TRANSACTIONS ACT OF 2003 A-4 (2012) (finding that nearly 20 percent of
consumers had an error in one or more of their three credit reports and that 5.4 percent of consumers
had errors that could result in less favorable loan terms).
50. Jonas Lerman, Big Data and Its Exclusions, 66 STAN. L. REV. ONLINE 55, 57 (2013).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

685

underrepresented.51 Errors of this sort may befall historically disadvantaged
groups at higher rates because they are less involved in the formal economy
and its data-generating activities, have unequal access to and relatively less
fluency in the technology necessary to engage online, or are less profitable
customers or important constituents and therefore less interesting as targets of
observation.52 Not only will the quality of individual records of members of
these groups be poorer as a consequence, but these groups as a whole will also
be less well represented in datasets, skewing conclusions that may be drawn
from an analysis of the data.
As an illustrative example, Crawford points to Street Bump, an
application for Boston residents that takes advantage of accelerometers built
into smart phones to detect when drivers ride over potholes.53 While Crawford
praises the cleverness and cost-effectiveness of this passive approach to
reporting road problems, she rightly warns that whatever information the city
receives from Street Bump will be biased by the uneven distribution of
smartphones across populations in different parts of the city.54 In particular,
systematic differences in smartphone ownership will very likely result in the
underreporting of road problems in the poorer communities where protected
groups disproportionately congregate.55 If the city were to rely on this data to
determine where it should direct its resources, it would only further underserve
these communities. Indeed, the city would discriminate against those who lack
the capability to report problems as effectively as wealthier residents with
smartphones.56
A similar dynamic could easily apply in an employment context if
members of protected classes are unable to report their interest in and
qualification for jobs listed online as easily or effectively as others due to
systematic differences in Internet access. The EEOC has established a program
called Eradicating Racism & Colorism from Employment (E-RACE) that
aims, at least in part, to prevent this sort of discrimination from occurring due

51. Kate Crawford, Think Again: Big Data, FOREIGN POLY (May 10, 2013),
http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/05/09/think_again_big_data
[https://perma.cc/S9ZAXEXH].
52. See id.; Lerman, supra note 50, at 57.
53. Crawford, supra note 51 (explaining that a sudden movement suggesting a broken road
will automatically prompt the phone to report the location to the city).
54. Id.
55. See id.
56. This is, of course, a more general problem with representative democracy. For a host of
reasons, the views and interests of the poor are relatively less well represented in the political process.
See, e.g., Larry M. Bartels, Economic Inequality and Political Representation, in THE
UNSUSTAINABLE AMERICAN STATE 167 (Lawrence Jacobs & Desmond King eds., 2009); MARTIN
GILENS, AFFLUENCE AND INFLUENCE: ECONOMIC INEQUALITY AND POLITICAL POWER IN AMERICA
(2012). The worry here, as expressed by Crawford, is that, for all its apparent promise, data mining
may further obfuscate or legitimize these dynamics rather than overcome them.

686

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

to an employers desire for high-tech hiring, such as video rsums.57 E-RACE
not only attempts to lower the barriers that would disproportionately burden
applicants who belong to a protected class, but also ensures that employers do
not develop an inaccurate impression of the incidence of qualified and
interested candidates from these communities. If employers were to rely on
tallies of high-tech candidates to direct their recruiting efforts, for example, any
count affected by a reporting bias could have adverse consequences for specific
populations systematically underrepresented in the dataset. Employers would
deny equal attention to those who reside in areas incorrectly pegged as having a
relatively lower concentration of qualified candidates.
Additional and even more severe risks may reside in the systematic
omission of members of protected classes from such datasets. The Street Bump
and Internet job application examples only discuss decisions that depend on
raw tallies, rather than datasets from which decision makers want to draw
generalizations and generate predictions. But data mining is especially sensitive
to statistical bias because data mining helps to discover patterns that
organizations tend to treat as generalizable findings even though the analyzed
data only includes a partial sample from a circumscribed period. To ensure that
data mining reveals patterns that hold true for more than the particular sample
under analysis, the sample must be proportionally representative of the entire
population, even though the sample, by definition, does not include every
case.58
If a sample includes a disproportionate representation of a particular class
(more or less than its actual incidence in the overall population), the results of
an analysis of that sample may skew in favor of or against the over- or
underrepresented class. While the representativeness of the data is often simply
assumed, this assumption is rarely justified and is perhaps more often
incorrect than correct.59 Data gathered for routine business purposes tend to
lack the rigor of social scientific data collection.60 As Lerman points out,
Businesses may ignore or undervalue the preferences and behaviors of
57. Why Do We Need E-RACE?, EQUAL EMPLOY. OPPORTUNITY COMMN,
http://www1.eeoc.gov/eeoc/initiatives/e-race/why_e-race.cfm [https://perma.cc/S3GY-2MD6] (last
visited Mar. 1, 2013). Due to the so-called digital divide, communities underserved by residential
Internet access rely heavily on mobile phones for connectivity and thus often have trouble even
uploading and updating traditional rsums. Kathryn Zickuhr & Aaron Smith, Digital Differences,
PEW RES. CTR. (Apr. 13, 2012), http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/04/13/digital-differences
[https://perma.cc/S545-42GY] (Among smartphone owners, young adults, minorities, those with no
college experience, and those with lower household income levels are more likely than other groups to
say that their phone is their main source of internet access.).
58. Data mining scholars have devised ways to address this known problem, but applying
these techniques is far from trivial. See Sinno Jialin Pan & Qiang Yang, A Survey on Transfer
Learning, 22 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE & DATA ENGG 1345, 135456 (2010).
59. Hand, supra note 26, at 7.
60. David Lazer, Big Data and Cloning Headless Frogs, COMPLEXITY & SOC. NETWORKS
BLOG (Feb. 16, 2014), https://web.archive.org/web/20140711164511/http://blogs.iq.harvard.edu/
netgov/2014/02/big_data_and_cloning_headless.html [https://perma.cc/TQ9A-TP2Z].

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

687

consumers who do not shop in ways that big data tools can easily capture,
aggregate, and analyze.61
In the employment context, even where a company performs an analysis
of the data from its entire population of employeesavoiding the apparent
problem of even having to select a samplethe organization must assume that
its future applicant pool will have the same degree of variance as its current
employee base. An organizations tendency, however, to perform such analyses
in order to change the composition of their employee base should put the
validity of this assumption into immediate doubt. The potential effect of this
assumption is the future mistreatment of individuals predicted to behave in
accordance with the skewed findings derived from the biased sample. Worse,
these results may lead to decision procedures that limit the future contact an
organization will have with specific groups, skewing still further the sample
upon which subsequent analyses will be performed.62 Limiting contact with
specific populations on the basis of unsound generalizations may deny
members of these populations the opportunity to prove that they buck the
apparent trend.
Overrepresentation in a dataset can also lead to disproportionately high
adverse outcomes for members of protected classes. Consider an example from
the workplace: managers may devote disproportionate attention to monitoring
the activities of employees who belong to a protected class and consequently
observe mistakes and transgressions at systematically higher rates than others,
in part because these managers fail to subject others who behave similarly to
the same degree of scrutiny. Not only does this provide managers with
justification for their prejudicial suspicions, but it also generates evidence that
overstates the relative incidence of offenses by members of these groups.
Where subsequent managers who hold no such prejudicial suspicions cannot
observe everyone equally, they may rely on this evidence to make predictions
about where to focus their attention in the future and thus further increase the
disproportionate scrutiny that they place on protected classes.
The efficacy of data mining is fundamentally dependent on the quality of
the data from which it attempts to draw useful lessons. If these data capture the
prejudicial or biased behavior of prior decision makers, data mining will learn
from the bad example that these decisions set. If the data fail to serve as a good
sample of a protected group, data mining will draw faulty lessons that could
serve as a discriminatory basis for future decision making.

61. Lerman, supra note 50, at 59.
62. Practitioners, particularly those involved in credit scoring, are well aware that they do not
know how the person purposefully passed over would have behaved if he had been given the
opportunity. Practitioners have developed methods to correct for this bias (which, in the case of credit
scoring, they refer to as reject inference). See, e.g., Jonathan Crook & John Banasik, Does Reject
Inference Really Improve the Performance of Application Scoring Models?, 28 J. BANKING & FIN.
857 (2004).

688

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

C. Feature Selection
Through a process called feature selection, organizationsand the data
miners that work for themmake choices about what attributes they observe
and subsequently fold into their analyses.63 These decisions can also have
serious implications for the treatment of protected classes if those factors that
better account for pertinent statistical variation among members of a protected
class are not well represented in the set of selected features.64 Members of
protected classes may find that they are subject to systematically less accurate
classifications or predictions because the details necessary to achieve equally
accurate determinations reside at a level of granularity and coverage that the
selected features fail to achieve.
This problem arises because data are necessarily reductive representations
of an infinitely more specific real-world object or phenomenon.65 These
representations may fail to capture enough detail to allow for the discovery of
crucial points of contrast. Increasing the resolution and range of the analysis
may still fail to capture the mechanisms that account for different outcomes
because such mechanisms may not lend themselves to exhaustive or effective
representation in the data, if such representations even exist. As Professors
Toon Calders and Indr liobait explain, [I]t is often impossible to collect all
the attributes of a subject or take all the environmental factors into account
with a model.66 While these limitations lend credence to the argument that a
dataset can never fully encompass the full complexity of the individuals it
seeks to represent, they do not reveal the inherent inadequacy of representation
as such.
At issue, really, are the coarseness and comprehensiveness of the criteria
that permit statistical discrimination and the uneven rates at which different
groups happen to be subject to erroneous determinations. Crucially, these
erroneous and potentially adverse outcomes are artifacts of statistical reasoning
rather than prejudice on the part of decision makers or bias in the composition
of the dataset. As Professor Frederick Schauer explains, decision makers that
rely on statistically sound but nonuniversal generalizations are being
simultaneously rational and unfair because certain individuals are actuarially
saddled by statistically sound inferences that are nevertheless inaccurate.67

63. FEATURE EXTRACTION, CONSTRUCTION AND SELECTION 7172 (Huan Liu & Hiroshi
Motoda eds., 1998).
64. Toon Calders & Indr liobait, Why Unbiased Computational Processes Can Lead to
Discriminative Decision Procedures, in DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY IN THE INFORMATION
SOCIETY, supra note 33, at 43, 46 ([T]he selection of attributes by which people are described in [a]
database may be incomplete.).
65. Annamarie Carusi, Data as Representation: Beyond Anonymity in E-Research Ethics, 1
INTL J. INTERNET RES. ETHICS 37, 4861 (2008).
66. Calders & liobait, supra note 64, at 47.
67. FREDERICK SCHAUER, PROFILES, PROBABILITIES, AND STEREOTYPES 37 (2006).
Insurance offers the most obvious example of this: the rate that a person pays for car insurance, for

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

689

Obtaining information that is sufficiently rich to permit precise distinctions can
be expensive. Even marginal improvements in accuracy may come at
significant practical costs and may justify a less granular and encompassing
analysis.68
To take an obvious example from the employment context, hiring
decisions that consider academic credentials tend to assign enormous weight to
the reputation of the college or university from which an applicant has
graduated, even though such reputations may communicate very little about the
applicants job-related skills and competencies.69 If equally competent
members of protected classes happen to graduate from these colleges or
universities at disproportionately low rates, decisions that turn on the
credentials conferred by these schools, rather than some set of more specific
qualities that more accurately sort individuals, will incorrectly and
systematically discount these individuals. Even if employers have a rational
incentive to look beyond credentials and focus on criteria that allow for more
precise and more accurate determinations, they may continue to favor
credentials because they communicate pertinent information at no cost to the
employer.70
Similar dynamics seem to account for the practice known as redlining,71
in which financial institutions employ especially general criteria to draw
distinctions between subpopulations (i.e., the neighborhood in which
individuals happen to reside), despite the fact that such distinctions fail to
capture significant variation within each subpopulation that would result in a
different assessment for certain members of these groups. While redlining in
America is well known to have had its basis in racial animus and prejudice,72
decision makers operating in this manner may attempt to justify their behavior
by pointing to the cost efficiency of relying on easily accessible information. In
other words, decision makers can argue that they are willing to tolerate higher
rates of erroneous determinations for certain groups because the benefits
instance, is determined by the way other people with similar characteristics happen to drive, even if the
person is a better driver than those who resemble him on the statistically pertinent dimensions.
68. Kasper Lippert-Rasmussen, We Are All Different: Statistical Discrimination and the
Right to Be Treated as an Individual, 15 J. ETHICS 47, 54 (2011) ([O]btaining information is costly,
so it is morally justified, all things considered, to treat people on the basis of statistical generalizations
even though one knows that, in effect, this will mean that one will treat some people in ways, for better
or worse, that they do not deserve to be treated.); see also Brian Dalessandro, Claudia Perlich & Troy
Raeder, Bigger Is Better, but at What Cost?: Estimating the Economic Value of Incremental Data
Assets, 2 BIG DATA 87 (2014).
69. See Matt Richtel, How Big Data Is Playing Recruiter for Specialized Workers, N.Y. TIMES
(Apr. 28, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/28/technology/how-big-data-is-playing-recruiterfor-specialized-workers.html [https://perma.cc/DC7A-W2B5].
70. As one commentator has put it in contemplating data-driven hiring, Big Data has its own
bias. . . . You measure what you can measure. Id.
71. See generally DAVID M. P. FREUND, COLORED PROPERTY: STATE POLICY AND WHITE
RACIAL POLITICS IN SUBURBAN AMERICA (2010).
72. Id.

690

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

derived from more granular dataand thus better accuracydo not justify the
costs. Of course, it may be no coincidence that such cost-benefit analyses seem
to justify treating groups composed disproportionately of members of protected
classes to systematically less accurate determinations.73 Redlining is illegal
because it can systematically discount entire areas composed primarily of
members of a protected class, despite the presence of some qualified
candidates.74
Cases of so-called rational racism are really just a special instance of this
more general phenomenonone in which race happens to be taken into
consideration explicitly. In such cases, decision makers take membership in a
protected class into account, even if they hold no prejudicial views, because
such membership seems to communicate relevant information that would be
difficult or impossible to obtain otherwise. Accordingly, the persistence of
distasteful forms of discrimination may be the result of a lack of information,
rather than a continued taste for discrimination.75 Professor Lior Strahilevitz
has argued, for instance, that when employers lack access to criminal records,
they may consider race in assessing an applicants likelihood of having a
criminal record because there are statistical differences in the rates at which
members of different racial groups have been convicted of crimes.76 In other
words, employers fall back on more immediately available and coarse features
when they cannot access more specific or verified information.77 Of course, as
Strahilevitz points out, race is a highly imperfect basis upon which to predict an
individuals criminal record, despite whatever differences may exist in the rates
at which members of different racial groups have been convicted of crimes,
because it is too coarse as an indicator.78

73. While animus was likely the main motivating factor for redlining, the stated rationales
were economic and about housing value. See DOUGLAS S. MASSEY & NANCY A. DENTON,
AMERICAN APARTHEID: SEGREGATION AND THE MAKING OF THE UNDERCLASS 5152 (1993).
Redlining persists today and may actually be motivated by profit, but it has the same deleterious
effects. See Rachel L. Swarns, Biased Lending Evolves, and Blacks Face Trouble Getting Mortgages,
N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 30 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/31/nyregion/hudson-city-banksettlement.html [https://perma.cc/P4YX-NTT9].
74. See Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Cisneros, 52 F.3d 1351, 1359 (6th Cir. 1995) (holding
that the Fair Housing Act prohibited redlining in order to eliminate the discriminatory business
practices which might prevent a person economically able to do so from purchasing a house regardless
of his race); NAACP v. Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co., 978 F.2d 287, 300 (7th Cir. 1992).
75. See generally Andrea Romei & Salvatore Ruggieri, Discrimination Data Analysis: A
Multi-Disciplinary Bibliography, in DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY,
supra note 33, at 109, 120.
76. Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Privacy Versus Antidiscrimination, 75 U. CHI. L. REV. 363, 364
(2008).
77. Id. This argument assumes that criminal records are relevant to employment, which is
often not true. See infra text accompanying note 175.
78. Strahilevitz, supra note 76, at 364; see also infra Part II.A. The law holds that decision
makers should refrain from considering membership in a protected class even if statistical evidence
seems to support certain inferences on that basis. The prohibition does not depend on whether decision

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

691

D. Proxies
Cases of decision making that do not artificially introduce discriminatory
effects into the data mining process may nevertheless result in systematically
less favorable determinations for members of protected classes. This is possible
when the criteria that are genuinely relevant in making rational and wellinformed decisions also happen to serve as reliable proxies for class
membership. In other words, the very same criteria that correctly sort
individuals according to their predicted likelihood of excelling at a jobas
formalized in some fashionmay also sort individuals according to class
membership.
In certain cases, there may be an obvious reason for this. Just as mining
from historical data may . . . discover traditional prejudices that are endemic in
reality (i.e., taste-based discrimination), so, too, may data mining discover
patterns of lower performances, skills or capacities of protected-by-law
groups.79 These discoveries not only reveal the simple fact of inequality, but
they also reveal that these are inequalities in which members of protected
classes are frequently in the relatively less favorable position. This has rather
obvious implications: if features held at a lower rate by members of protected
groups nevertheless possess relevance in rendering legitimate decisions, such
decisions will necessarily result in systematically less favorable determinations
for these individuals. For example, by conferring greater attention and
opportunities to employees that they predict will prove most competent at some
task, employers may find that they subject members of protected groups to
consistently disadvantageous treatment because the criteria that determine the
attractiveness of employees happen to be held at systematically lower rates by
members of these groups.80
Decision makers do not necessarily intend this disparate impact because
they hold prejudicial beliefs; rather, their reasonable priorities as profit seekers
unintentionally recapitulate the inequality that happens to exist in society.
Furthermore, this may occur even if proscribed criteria have been removed
from the dataset, the data are free from latent prejudice or bias, the features are
especially granular and diverse, and the only goal is to maximize classificatory
or predictive accuracy. The problem stems from what researchers call
redundant encodings, cases in which membership in a protected class
happens to be encoded in other data.81 This occurs when a particular piece of
data or certain values for that piece of data are highly correlated with
makers can gain (easy or cheap) access to alternative criteria that hold greater predictive value. See
Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 326 (2003).
79. Romei & Ruggieri, supra note 75, at 121.
80. Faisal Kamiran, Toon Calders & Mykola Pechenizkiy, Techniques for DiscriminationFree Predictive Models, in DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY, supra
note 33, at 22324.
81. Cynthia Dwork et al., Fairness Through Awareness, 3 PROC. INNOVATIONS
THEORETICAL COMPUTER SCI. CONF. 214 app. at 226 (2012) (Catalog of Evils).

692

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

membership in specific protected classes. Datas significant statistical
relevance to the decision at hand helps explain why data mining can result in
seemingly discriminatory models even when its only objective is to ensure the
greatest possible accuracy for its determinations. If there is a disparate
distribution of an attribute, a more precise form of data mining will be more
likely to capture that distribution. Better data and more features will simply
come closer to exposing the exact extent of inequality.
E. Masking
Data mining could also breathe new life into traditional forms of
intentional discrimination because decision makers with prejudicial views can
mask their intentions by exploiting each of the mechanisms enumerated above.
Stated simply, any form of discrimination that happens unintentionally can also
be orchestrated intentionally. For instance, decision makers could knowingly
and purposefully bias the collection of data to ensure that mining suggests rules
that are less favorable to members of protected classes.82 They could likewise
attempt to preserve the known effects of prejudice in prior decision making by
insisting that such decisions constitute a reliable and impartial set of examples
from which to induce a decision-making rule. And decision makers could
intentionally rely on features that only permit coarse-grained distinction
makingdistinctions that result in avoidably higher rates of erroneous
determinations for members of a protected class. In denying themselves finergrained detail, decision makers would be able to justify writing off entire
groups composed disproportionately of members of protected classes. A form
of digital redlining, this decision masks efforts to engage in intentional
discrimination by abstracting to a level of analysis that fails to capture lower
level variations. As a result, certain members of protected classes might not be
seen as attractive candidates. Here, prejudice rather than some legitimate
business reason (such as cost) motivates decision makers to intentionally
restrict the particularity of their decision making to a level that can only paint
in avoidably broad strokes. This condemns entire groups, composed
disproportionately of members of protected classes, to systematically less
favorable treatment.
Because data mining holds the potential to infer otherwise unseen
attributes, including those traditionally deemed sensitive,83 it can indirectly
determine individuals membership in protected classes and unduly discount,
penalize, or exclude such people accordingly. In other words, data mining
could grant decision makers the ability to distinguish and disadvantage
members of protected classes even if those decision makers do not have access
to explicit information about individuals class membership. Data mining could
82. See id. (discussing the [s]elf-fulfilling prophecy).
83. See Solon Barocas, Leaps and Bounds: Toward a Normative Theory of Inferential Privacy
9 (Nov. 11, 2015) (in-progress and unpublished manuscript) (on file with authors).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

693

instead help to pinpoint reliable proxies for such membership and thus place
institutions in the position to automatically sort individuals into their respective
class without ever having to learn these facts directly.84 The most immediate
implication is that institutions could employ data mining to circumvent the
barriers, both practical and legal, that have helped to withhold individuals
protected class membership from consideration.
Additionally, data mining could provide cover for intentional
discrimination of this sort because the process conceals the fact that decision
makers determined and considered the individuals class membership. The
worry, then, is not simply that data mining introduces novel ways for decision
makers to satisfy their taste for illegal discrimination; rather, the worry is that it
may mask actual cases of such discrimination.85 Although scholars, policy
makers, and lawyers have long been aware of the dangers of masking,86 data
mining significantly enhances the ability to conceal acts of intentional
discrimination by finding ever more remote and complex proxies for proscribed
criteria.87
Intentional discrimination and its masking have so far garnered
disproportionate attention in discussions of data mining,88 often to the
exclusion of issues arising from the many forms of unintentional discrimination
described above. While data mining certainly introduces novel ways to
discriminate intentionally and to conceal those intentions, most cases of
employment discrimination are already sufficiently difficult to prove;
employers motivated by conscious prejudice would have little to gain by
pursuing these complex and costly mechanisms to further mask their
intentions.89 When it comes to data mining, unintentional discrimination is the
more pressing concern because it is likely to be far more common and easier to
overlook.

84. Id. at 913.
85. Data miners who wish to discriminate can do so using relevant or irrelevant criteria. Either
way the intent would make the action masking. If an employer masked using highly relevant data,
litigation arising from it likely would be tried under a mixed-motive framework, which asks whether
the same action would have been taken without the intent to discriminate. See infra Part II.A.
86. See, e.g., Custers, supra note 33, at 910.
87. See Barocas, supra note 83.
88. See, e.g., Alistair Croll, Big Data Is Our Generations Civil Rights Issue, and We Dont
Know It, SOLVE FOR INTERESTING (July 31, 2012, 12:40 PM), http://solveforinteresting.com/big-datais-our-generations-civil-rights-issue-and-we-dont-know-it [https://perma.cc/BS8S-6T7S]. This post
generated significant online chatter immediately upon publication and has become one of the
canonical texts in the current debate. It has also prompted a number of responses from scholars. See,
e.g., Anders Sandberg, Asking the Right Questions: Big Data and Civil Rights, PRAC. ETHICS (Aug.
16, 2012), http://blog.practicalethics.ox.ac.uk/2012/08/asking-the-right-questions-big-data-and-civilrights [https://perma.cc/NC36-NBZN].
89. See Linda Hamilton Krieger, The Content of Our Categories: A Cognitive Bias Approach
to Discrimination and Equal Employment Opportunity, 47 STAN. L. REV. 1161, 1177 (1995).

694

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

II.
TITLE VII LIABILITY FOR DISCRIMINATORY DATA MINING
Current antidiscrimination law is not well equipped to address the cases of
discrimination stemming from the problems described in Part I. This Part
considers how Title VII might apply to these cases. Other antidiscrimination
laws, such as the Americans with Disabilities Act, will exhibit differences in
specific operation, but the main thrust of antidiscrimination law is fairly
consistent across regimes, and Title VII serves as an illustrative example.90
An employer sued under Title VII may be found liable for employment
discrimination under one of two theories of liability: disparate treatment and
disparate impact.91 Disparate treatment comprises two different strains of
discrimination: (1) formal disparate treatment of similarly situated people and
(2) intent to discriminate.92 Disparate impact refers to policies or practices that
are facially neutral but have a disproportionately adverse impact on protected
classes.93 Disparate impact is not concerned with the intent or motive for a
policy; where it applies, the doctrine first asks whether there is a disparate
impact on members of a protected class, then whether there is some business
justification for that impact, and finally, whether there were less discriminatory
means of achieving the same result.94
Liability under Title VII for discriminatory data mining will depend on
the particular mechanism by which the inequitable outcomes are generated.
This Part explores the disparate treatment and disparate impact doctrines and
analyzes which mechanisms could generate liability under each theory.
A. Disparate Treatment
Disparate treatment recognizes liability for both explicit formal
classification and intentional discrimination.95 Formal discrimination, in which
membership in a protected class is used as an input to the model, corresponds
to an employer classifying employees or potential hires according to
membership in a protected class and differentiating them on that basis. Formal
90. The biggest difference between the Americans with Disabilities Act and Title VII is the
requirement that an employer make reasonable accommodations for disabilities. 42 U.S.C.
 12112(b)(5) (2012). But some scholars have argued that even this difference is illusory and that
accommodations law is functionally similar to Title VII, though worded differently. See Samuel R.
Bagenstos, Rational Discrimination, Accommodation, and the Politics of (Disability) Civil Rights,
89 VA. L. REV. 825, 833 & n.15 (2003) (comparing accommodations law to disparate treatment);
Christine Jolls, Antidiscrimination and Accommodation, 115 HARV. L. REV. 642, 652 (2001)
(comparing accommodations law to disparate impact).
91. See 42 U.S.C.  2000e; Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557, 577 (2009).
92. Richard A. Primus, The Future of Disparate Impact, 108 MICH. L. REV. 1341, 1351 n.56
(2010) (explaining that, for historical reasons, disparate treatment became essentially not-disparateimpact and now we rarely notice the two different embedded theories).
93. See Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 430 (1971).
94. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k).
95. Id.  2000e-2(a), (k); see Primus, supra note 92, at 135051 n.56.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

695

discrimination covers both the straightforward denial of opportunities based on
protected class membership and the use of rational racism.96 In traditional
contexts, rational racism is considered rational because there are cases in which
its users believe it is an accurate, if coarse-grained, proxyor at least the best
available one in a given situation.97 In the world of data mining, though, that
need not be the case. Even if membership in a protected class were specified as
an input, the eventual model that emerges could see it as the least significant
feature. In that case, there would be no discriminatory effect, but there would
be a disparate treatment violation, because considering membership in a
protected class as a potential proxy is a legal classificatory harm in itself.98
Formal liability does not correspond to any particular discrimination
mechanism within data mining; it can occur equally well in any of them.
Because classification itself can be a legal harm, irrespective of the effect,99 the
same should be true of using protected class as an input to a system for which
the entire purpose is to build a classificatory model.100 The irony is that the use
of protected class as an input is usually irrelevant to the outcome in terms of
discriminatory effect, at least given a large enough number of input features.
The target variable will, in reality, be correlated to the membership in a
protected class somewhere between 0 percent and 100 percent. If the trait is
perfectly uncorrelated, including membership in the protected class as an input
will not change the output, and there will be no discriminatory effect.101 On the
other end of the spectrum, where membership in the protected class is perfectly
predictive of the target variable, the fact will be redundantly encoded in the
other data. The only way using membership in the protected class as an explicit
feature will change the outcome is if the information is otherwise not rich
enough to detect such membership. Membership in the protected class will
prove relevant to the exact extent it is already redundantly encoded. Given a
rich enough set of features, the chance that such membership is redundantly
encoded approaches certainty. Thus, a data mining model with a large number
of variables will determine the extent to which membership in a protected class
is relevant to the sought-after trait whether or not that information is an input.
Formal discrimination therefore should have no bearing whatsoever on the

96. Michelle R. Gomez, The Next Generation of Disparate Treatment: A Merger of Law and
Social Science, 32 REV. LITIG. 553, 562 (2013).
97. Strahilevitz, supra note 76, at 36567.
98. Richard A. Primus, Equal Protection and Disparate Impact: Round Three, 117 HARV. L.
REV. 494, 504 (2003).
99. See Jed Rubenfeld, Affirmative Action, 107 YALE L.J. 427, 433 (1997) (discussing
[c]lassificationism); Primus, supra note 98, at 504, 56768 (discussing expressive harms).
100. Membership in a protected class is still a permissible input to a holistic determination
when the focus is diversity, but where classification is the goal, such as here, it is not. See Grutter v.
Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 325 (2003) (noting that diversity is a compelling state interest that can
survive strict scrutiny).
101. That is, not counting any expressive harm that might come from classification by protected
class.

696

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

outcome of the model. Additionally, by analyzing the data, an employer could
probabilistically determine an employees membership in that same protected
class, if the employer did indeed want to know.
To analyze intentional discrimination other than mere formal
discrimination, a brief description of disparate treatment doctrine is necessary.
A Title VII disparate treatment case will generally proceed under either the
McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting scheme or the Price-Waterhouse mixed
motive regime.102 Under the McDonnell-Douglas framework, the plaintiff
who has suffered an adverse employment action has the initial responsibility to
establish a prima facie case of discrimination by demonstrating that a similarly
situated person who is not a member of a protected class would not have
suffered the same fate.103 This can be shown with circumstantial evidence of
discriminatory intent, such as disparaging remarks made by the employer or
procedural irregularities in promotion or hiring; only very rarely will an
employer openly admit to discriminatory conduct. If the plaintiff successfully
demonstrates that the adverse action treated protected class members
differently, then the burden shifts to the defendant-employer to offer a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory basis for the decision. The defendant need not
prove the reason is true; his is only a burden of production.104 Once the
defendant has offered a nondiscriminatory alternative, the ultimate burden of
persuasion falls to the plaintiff to demonstrate that the proffered reason is
pretextual.105
In the data mining context, liability for masking is clear as a theoretical
matter, no matter which mechanism for discrimination is employed. The fact
that it is accomplished algorithmically does not make it less of a disparate
treatment violation, as the entire idea of masking is pretextual. In fact, in the
traditional, nondata mining context, the word masking has occasionally been
used to refer to pretext.106 Like in any disparate treatment case, however, proof
will be difficult to come by, something even truer for masking.107
102. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973); Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins,
490 U.S. 228 (1989).
103. This is similar to the computer science definition of discrimination. Calders & liobait,
supra note 64, at 49. (A classifier discriminates with respect to a sensitive attribute, e.g. gender, if for
two persons which only differ by their gender (and maybe some characteristics irrelevant for the
classification problem at hand) that classifier predicts different labels.).
104. St. Marys Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 507 (1993).
105. Id.
106. See Keyes v. Secy of the Navy, 853 F.2d 1016, 1026 (1st Cir. 1988) (explaining that it is
the plaintiffs burden to show that the proffered reasons for hiring an alternative were pretexts aimed
at masking sex or race discrimination); Custers, supra note 33, at 910; Megan Whitehill, Better Safe
than Subjective: The Problematic Intersection of Prehire Social Networking Checks and Title VII
Employment Discrimination, 85 TEMP. L. REV. 229, 250 (2012) (referring to [m]asking [p]retext in
the third stage of McDonnell-Douglas framework).
107. See supra Part I.E. This is a familiar problem to antidiscrimination law, and it is often cited
as one of the rationales for disparate impact liability in the first placeto smoke out intentional
invidious discrimination. See infra Part III.B.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

697

The McDonnell-Douglas framework operates on a presumption that if the
rationale that the employer has given is found to be untrue, the employer must
be hiding his true discriminatory motive.108 Because the focus of the
McDonnell-Douglas framework is on pretext and cover-up, it can only address
conscious, willful discrimination.109 Under the McDonnell-Douglas
framework, a court must find either that the employer intended to discriminate
or did not discriminate at all.110 Thus, unintentional discrimination will not lead
to liability.
A Title VII disparate treatment case can also be tried under the mixedmotive framework, first recognized in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins111 and
most recently modified by Desert Palace, Inc. v. Costa.112 In the mixed-motive
framework, a plaintiff need not demonstrate that the employers
nondiscriminatory rationale was pretextual, but merely that discrimination was
a motivating factor in the adverse employment action.113 As a practical
matter, this means that the plaintiff must show that the same action would not
have been taken absent the discriminatory motive.114 As several commentators
108. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 805 (1973) (The plaintiff must be
given a full and fair opportunity to demonstrate by competent evidence that the presumptively valid
reasons for his rejection were in fact a coverup for a racially discriminatory decision). While, as a
theoretical matter, the plaintiff must prove that the employers reason was a pretext for discrimination
specifically, the Supreme Court has held that a jury can reasonably find that the fact that an employer
had only a pretextual reason to fall back on is itself circumstantial evidence of discrimination. Hicks,
509 U.S. at 511 (The factfinders disbelief of the reasons put forward by the defendant (particularly if
disbelief is accompanied by a suspicion of mendacity) may, together with the elements of the prima
facie case, suffice to show intentional discrimination.).
109. See Tristin K. Green, Discrimination in Workplace Dynamics: Toward a Structural
Account of Disparate Treatment Theory, 38 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 91, 114 (2003) (Presuming that
individuals know the real reason for their actions, the pretext model of disparate treatment provides
that an employer can be held to have discriminated when the plaintiff establishes a minimal prima
facie case and shows that the reason given for the adverse decision is unworthy of credence.); Susan
Sturm, Second Generation Employment Discrimination: A Structural Approach, 101 COLUM. L. REV.
458, 458 (2001); see also Melissa Hart, Subjective Decisionmaking and Unconscious Discrimination,
56 ALA. L. REV. 741, 74950 (2005) (critiquing the courts requirement of proving employer
dishonesty, but suggesting that, absent this requirement, Title VII could handle unconscious
discrimination without altering the law).
110. Krieger, supra note 89, at 1170.
111. 490 U.S. 228 (1989).
112. 539 U.S. 90 (2003).
113. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(m) (2012); Desert Palace, 539 U.S. at 101 (In order to obtain [a
mixed-motive jury instruction], a plaintiff need only present sufficient evidence for a reasonable jury
to conclude, by a preponderance of the evidence, that race, color, religion, sex, or national origin was
a motivating factor for any employment practice.). The efficacy of data mining is fundamentally
dependent on the quality of the data from which it attempts to draw useful lessons. If these data
capture the prejudicial or biased behavior of prior decision makers, data mining will learn from the bad
example that these decisions set. If the data fail to serve as a good sample of a protected group, data
mining will draw faulty lessons that could serve as a discriminatory basis for future decision making.
114. Charles A. Sullivan, Disparate Impact: Looking Past the Desert Palace Mirage, 47 WM. &
MARY L. REV. 911, 91416, 916 n.20 (2005); see also Krieger, supra note 89, at 117072; D. Don
Welch, Removing Discriminatory Barriers: Basing Disparate Treatment Analysis on Motive Rather
than Intent, 60 S. CAL. L. REV. 733, 740 (1987).

698

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

have pointed out, motive and intent are not necessarily synonymous.115 Motive
can be read more broadly to include unconscious discrimination, including
anything that influences a person to act, such as emotions or desires.116
Nonetheless, courts have conflated the meanings of motive and intent such that
the phrase motive or intent has come to refer only to conscious choices.117
Thus, while most individual decision making probably belongs in a mixedmotive framework, as each decision a person makes comprises a complicated
mix of motivations,118 the mixed-motive framework will be no better than the
pretext framework at addressing bias that occurs absent conscious intent.119
Except for masking, discriminatory data mining is by stipulation
unintentional. Unintentional disparate treatment is not a problem that is new to
data mining. A vast scholarly literature has developed regarding the laws
treatment of unconscious, implicit bias.120 Such treatment can occur when an
employer has internalized some racial stereotype and applies it or, without
realizing it, monitors an employee more closely until the employer finds a
violation.121 The employee is clearly treated differently, but it is not intentional,
and the employer is unaware of it. As Professor Samuel Bagenstos
summarized, at this point, it may be difficult, if not impossible, for a court to
go back and reconstruct the numerous biased evaluations and perceptions that
ultimately resulted in an adverse employment decision.122 Within the scholarly
literature, there is [s]urprising unanimity that the law does not adequately
address unconscious disparate treatment.123

115.
116.

Krieger, supra note 89, at 1243; Sullivan, supra note 114, at 915.
Krieger, supra note 89, at 1243; Sullivan, supra note 114, at 915 n.18 (quoting Motive,
OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY (1st ed. 1933)).
117. Sullivan, supra note 114, at 91416, 916 n.20.
118. Amy L. Wax, Discrimination as Accident, 74 IND. L.J. 1129, 1149 & n.21 (1999); Krieger,
supra note 89, at 1223. In fact, after the Supreme Court decided Desert Palace, many scholars thought
that it had effectively overruled the McDonnell-Douglas framework, forcing all disparate treatment
cases into a mixed-motive framework. See, e.g., Sullivan, supra note 114, at 93336 (discussing the
then-emerging scholarly consensus). This has not played out so far, with courts and scholars split on
the matter. See, e.g., Kendall D. Isaac, Is It A or Is It The? Deciphering the Motivating-Factor
Standard in Employment Discrimination and Retaliation Cases, 1 TEX. A&M L. REV. 55, 74 (2013)
(McDonnell Douglas has never been overruled and remains widely utilized.); Barrett S. Moore,
Shifting the Burden: Genuine Disputes and Employment Discrimination Standards of Proof, 35 U.
ARK. LITTLE ROCK L. REV. 113, 12329, 128 n.146 (2012) (noting a circuit split on the issue).
119. See Krieger, supra note 89, at 118283.
120. See, e.g., Christine Jolls & Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Implicit Bias, 94 CALIF. L. REV.
969, 978 n.45 (2006) (collecting sources); Linda Hamilton Krieger & Susan T. Fiske, Behavioral
Realism in Employment Discrimination Law: Implicit Bias and Disparate Treatment, 94 CALIF. L.
REV. 997, 1003 n.21 (2006) (collecting sources).
121. This example can be ported directly to data mining as overrepresentation in data
collection. See supra Part I.B.2.
122. Samuel R. Bagenstos, The Structural Turn and the Limits of Antidiscrimination Law, 94
CALIF. L. REV. 1, 9 (2006).
123. Sullivan, supra note 114, at 1000. There is, however, no general agreement on whether the
law should treat such discrimination as disparate treatment or disparate impact. Compare Krieger,
supra note 89, at 1231 (explaining that because the bias causes employers to treat people differently, it

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

699

There are a few possible ways to analogize discriminatory data mining to
unintentional disparate treatment in the traditional context, based on where one
believes the treatment lies. Either the disparate treatment occurs at the
decision to apply a predictive model that will treat members of a protected
class differently, or it occurs when the disparate result of the model is used in
the ultimate hiring decision. In the first scenario, the intent at issue is the
decision to apply a predictive model with known disproportionate impact on
protected classes. In the second, the disparate treatment occurs if, after the
employer sees the disparate result, he proceeds anyway. If the employer
continues because he liked the discrimination produced in either scenario, then
intent is clear. If not, then this just devolves into a standard disparate impact
scenario, with liability based on effect. Under disparate impact theory, deciding
to follow through on a test with discriminatory effect does not suddenly render
it disparate treatment.124
Another option is to imagine the model as the decision maker exhibiting
implicit bias. That is, because of biases hidden to the predictive model such as
nonrepresentative data or mislabeled examples, the model reaches a
discriminatory result. This analogy turns every mechanism except proxy
discrimination into the equivalent of implicit bias exhibited by individual
decision makers. The effect of bias is one factor among the many different
factors that go into the model-driven decision, just like in an individuals
adverse employment decision.125 Would a more expansive definition of motive
fix this scenario?
Because the doctrine focuses on human decision makers as discriminators,
the answer is no. Even if disparate treatment doctrine could capture
unintentional discrimination, it would only address such discrimination
stemming from human bias. For example, the person who came up with the
idea for Street Bump ultimately devised a system that suffers from reporting
bias,126 but it was not because he or she was implicitly employing some racial
stereotype. Rather, it was simply inattentiveness to problems with the sampling
frame. This is not to say that his or her own bias had nothing to do with itthe
person likely owned a smartphone and thus did not think about the people who
do notbut no one would say that it was even implicit bias against protected
should be considered a disparate treatment violation), with Sullivan, supra note 114, at 96971
(arguing that the purpose of disparate impact is a catch-all provision to address those types of bias that
disparate treatment cannot reach). This disagreement is important and even more pronounced in the
case of data mining. See infra Part III. For now, we assume each case can be analyzed separately.
124. In fact, after Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009), deciding not to apply such a test
after noticing the discriminatory effect may give rise to a disparate treatment claim in the other
direction.
125. Bagenstos, supra note 122, at 9; Krieger, supra note 89, at 118586 (Not only disparate
treatment analysis, but the entire normative structure of Title VIIs injunction not to discriminate,
rests on the assumption that decisionmakers possess transparency of mindthat they are aware of
the reasons why they are about to make, or have made, a particular employment decision.).
126. See supra note 51 and accompanying text.

700

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

classes that motivated the decision, even under the expansive definition of the
word motive.127
The only possible analogy relevant to disparate treatment, then, is to those
data mining mechanisms of unintentional discrimination that reflect a real
persons biassomething like LinkedIns Talent Match recommendation
engine, which relies on potentially prejudiced human assessments of
employees.128 As a general rule, an employer may not avoid disparate treatment
liability by encoding third-party preferences as a rationale for a hiring
decision.129 But, once again, to be found liable under current doctrine, the
employer would likely both have to know that this is the specific failure
mechanism of the model and choose it based on this fact.
There is one other interesting question regarding disparate treatment
doctrine: whether the intent standard includes knowledge. This is not a problem
that arises often when a human is making a single employment determination.
Assuming disparate treatment occurs in a given case, it is generally either
intended or unconscious. What would it mean to have an employer know that
he was treating an employee differently, but still take the action he had always
planned to take without intent to treat the employee differently? It seems like
an impossible line to draw.130
With data mining, though, unlike unconscious bias, it is possible to audit
the resulting model and inform an employer that she will be treating individuals
differently before she does so. If an employer intends to employ the model, but
knows it will produce a disparate impact, does she intend to discriminate? This
is a more realistic parsing of intent and knowledge than in the case of an
individual, nonsystematic employment decision. Neither pretext nor motive
exists here, and throughout civil and criminal law, knowledge and intent
are considered distinct states of mind, so there would likely be no liability. On
the other hand, courts may use knowledge of discrimination as evidence to find
intent.131 And while the statutes language only covers intentional
discrimination,132 a broad definition of intent could include knowledge or
127. Of course, the very presumption of a designs neutrality is itself a bias that may work
against certain people. See Langdon Winner, Do Artifacts Have Politics?, 109 DAEDALUS 121, 125
(1980). But, as this is a second-order effect, we need not address it here.
128. See Woods, supra note 46.
129. See 29 C.F.R.  1604.2(a)(1)(iii) (2015) (stating the EEOCs position that the preferences
of coworkers, the employer, clients or customers cannot be used to justify disparate treatment); see
also Fernandez v. Wynn Oil Co., 653 F.2d 1273, 127677 (9th Cir. 1981); Diaz v. Pan Am. World
Airways, Inc., 442 F.2d 385, 389 (5th Cir. 1971).
130. See Krieger, supra note 89, at 1185 (discussing disparate treatments assumption of
decisionmaker self-awareness).
131. Columbus Bd. of Educ. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449, 464 (1979) ([A]ctions having
foreseeable and anticipated disparate impact are relevant evidence to prove the ultimate fact, forbidden
purpose.); Pers. Admr of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 279 n.25 (1979) ([W]hen the adverse
consequences of a law upon an identifiable group are . . . inevitable . . . , a strong inference that the
adverse effects were desired can reasonably be drawn.).
132. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(h) (2012).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

701

substantial certainty of the result.133 Because the situation has not come up
often, the extent of the intent required is as yet unknown.134
In sum, aside from rational racism and masking (with some difficulties),
disparate treatment doctrine does not appear to do much to regulate
discriminatory data mining.
B. Disparate Impact
Where there is no discriminatory intent, disparate impact doctrine should
be better suited to finding liability for discrimination in data mining. In a
disparate impact case, a plaintiff must show that a particular facially neutral
employment practice causes a disparate impact with respect to a protected
class.135 If shown, the defendant-employer may demonstrate that the
challenged practice is job related for the position in question and consistent
with business necessity.136 If the defendant makes a successful showing to that
effect, the plaintiff may still win by showing that the employer could have used
an alternative employment practice with less discriminatory results.137
The statute is unclear as to the required showing for essentially every
single element of a disparate impact claim. First, it is unclear how much
disparate impact is needed to make out a prima facie case.138 The EEOC,
charged with enforcing Title VIIs mandate, has created the so-called fourfifths rule as a presumption of adverse impact: A selection rate for any race,
sex, or ethnic group which is less than four-fifths . . . of the rate for the group
133. See Julia Kobick, Note, Discriminatory Intent Reconsidered: Folk Concepts of
Intentionality and Equal Protection Jurisprudence, 45 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 517, 551 (2010)
(arguing that courts should regularly consider knowledge and foreseeability of disparate impact as an
intended effect); cf. RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS  8A cmt. b (AM. LAW INST. 1965) (Intent
is not . . . limited to consequences which are desired. If the actor knows that the consequences are
certain, or substantially certain, to result from his act, and still goes ahead, he is treated by the law as if
he had in fact desired to produce the result.).
134. Determining that a model is discriminatory is also like trying and failing to validate a test
under disparate impact doctrine. See infra Part II.B. If a test fails validation, the employer using it
would know that he is discriminating if he applies it, but that does not imply that he is subject to
disparate treatment liability. Nonetheless, validation is part of the business necessity defense, and that
defense is not available against disparate treatment claims. Thus, the analysis does not necessarily have
the same result. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k)(2). One commentator has argued that including knowledge as
a state of mind leading to disparate treatment liability would effectively collapse disparate impact and
disparate treatment by conflating intent and effect. Jessie Allen, A Possible Remedy for Unthinking
Discrimination, 61 BROOK. L. REV. 1299, 1314 (1995). But others still have noted that with respect to
knowledge, a claim is still about the treatment of an individual, not the incidental disparate impact of a
neutral policy. See Carin Ann Clauss, Comparable WorthThe Theory, Its Legal Foundation, and the
Feasibility of Implementation, 20 U. MICH. J.L. REFORM 7, 62 (1986).
135. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k)(1)(A).
136. Id.
137. Id.
138. The statute does not define the requirement and Supreme Court has never addressed the
issue. See, e.g., Sullivan, supra note 114, at 954 & n.153. For a brief discussion of the different
approaches to establishing disparate impact, see Pamela L. Perry, Two Faces of Disparate Impact
Discrimination, 59 FORDHAM L. REV. 523, 57074 (1991).

702

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

with the highest rate will generally be regarded . . . as evidence of adverse
impact.139 The Uniform Guidelines on Employment Selection Procedures
(Guidelines) also state, however, that smaller differences can constitute adverse
impact and greater differences may not, depending on circumstances. Thus, the
four-fifths rule is truly just a guideline.140 For the purposes of this Part, it is
worthwhile to just assume that the discriminatory effects are prominent enough
to establish disparate impact as an initial matter.141
The next step in the litigation is the business necessity defense. This
defense is, in a very real sense, the crux of disparate impact analysis, weighing
Title VIIs competing goals of limiting the effects of discrimination while
allowing employers discretion to advance important business goals. Griggs v.
Duke Power Co.142the decision establishing the business necessity defense
alongside disparate impact doctrine itselfarticulated the defense in several
different ways:
A challenged employment practice must be shown to be related to job
performance, have a manifest relationship to the employment in
question, be demonstrably a reasonable measure of job
performance, bear some relationship to job-performance ability,
and/or must measure the person for the job and not the person in the
abstract.143
The Supreme Court was not clear on what, if any, difference existed between
job-relatedness and business necessity, at one point seeming to use the terms
interchangeably: The touchstone is business necessity. If an employment
practice which operates to exclude Negroes cannot be shown to be related to
job performance, the practice is prohibited.144 The focus of the Court was
clearly on future job performance, and the term job-related has come to mean
a practice that is predictive of job performance.145 Because the definitions of
job-relatedness and business necessity have never been clear, courts defer when
applying the doctrine and finding the appropriate balance.146
Originally, the business necessity defense seemed to apply narrowly. In
Griggs, Duke Power had instituted new hiring requirements including a high
school diploma and success on a general intelligence test for previously

139. Uniform Guidelines on Employment Selection Procedures, 29 C.F.R.  1607.4(D) (2015)
[hereinafter Guidelines].
140. Id.
141. We will return to this when discussing the need to grapple with substantive fairness. See
infra Part III.B.
142. 401 U.S. 424 (1971).
143. Linda Lye, Comment, Title VIIs Tangled Tale: The Erosion and Confusion of Disparate
Impact and the Business Necessity Defense, 19 BERKELEY J. EMP. & LAB. L. 315, 321 (1998)
(footnotes omitted) (quoting Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 43136 (1971)).
144. Griggs, 401 U.S. at 431; see also Lye, supra note 143, at 320.
145. Lye, supra note 143, at 355 & n.206.
146. Id. at 31920, 34853; Amy L. Wax, Disparate Impact Realism, 53 WM. & MARY L.
REV. 621, 63334 (2011).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

703

white-only divisions. Duke Power did not institute such requirements in
divisions where it had previously hired black employees.147 The Court ruled
that the new requirements were not a business necessity because employees
who have not completed high school or taken the tests have continued to
perform satisfactorily and make progress in departments for which the high
school and test criteria are now used.148 Furthermore, the requirements were
implemented without any study of their future effect.149 The Court also rejected
the argument that the requirements would improve the overall quality of the
workforce.150
By 1979, the Court began treating business necessity as a much looser
standard.151 In New York City Transit Authority v. Beazer,152 the transit
authority had implemented a rule barring drug users from employment,
including current users of methadone, otherwise known as recovering heroin
addicts. In dicta, the Court stated that a narcotics rule, which significantly
serves the legitimate employment goals of safety and efficiency, was
assuredly job related.153 This was the entire analysis of the business necessity
defense in the case. Moreover, the rationale was acceptable as applied to the
entire transit authority, even where only 25 percent of the jobs were labeled as
safety sensitive.154 Ten years later, the Court made the business necessity
doctrine even more defendant-friendly in Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio.155
After Wards Cove, the business necessity defense required a court to engage in
a reasoned review of the employers justification for his use of the challenged
practice. . . . [T]here is no requirement that the challenged practice be
essential or indispensable to the employers business for it to pass
muster . . . .156 The Court also reallocated the burden to plaintiffs to prove that
business necessity was lacking and even referred to the defense as a business
justification rather than a business necessity.157 The Wards Cove Court went
so far that Congress directly addressed the decision in the Civil Rights Act of
1991 (1991 Act), which codified disparate impact and reset the standards to the
day before Wards Cove was decided.158
Because the substantive standards for job-relatedness or business
necessity were uncertain before Wards Cove, however, the confusion persisted

147. Griggs, 401 U.S. at 42728.
148. Id. at 43132.
149. Id. at 432.
150. Id. at 431.
151. See Nicole J. DeSario, Reconceptualizing Meritocracy: The Decline of Disparate Impact
Discrimination Law, 38 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 479, 49596 (2003); Lye, supra note 143, at 328.
152. 440 U.S. 568 (1979).
153. Id. at 587 & n.31.
154. Id.
155. 490 U.S. 642 (1989).
156. Id. at 659.
157. Id.
158. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k)(1)(C) (2012).

704

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

even after the 1991 Act was passed.159 At the time, both sidescivil rights
groups and the Bush administration, proponents of a rigorous and more lenient
business necessity defense respectivelydeclared victory.160
Since then, courts have recognized that business necessity lies somewhere
in the middle of two extremes.161 Some courts require that the hiring criteria
bear a manifest relationship162 to the employment in question or that they be
significantly correlated to job performance.163 The Third Circuit was briefly
an outlier, holding that hiring criteria must effectively measure the minimum
qualifications for successful performance of the job in order to meet the strict
business necessity standard.164 This tougher standard would, as a practical
matter, ban general aptitude tests with any disparate impact because a particular
cutoff score cannot be shown to distinguish between those able and completely
unable to do the work.165 For example, other unmeasured skills and abilities
could theoretically compensate for the lower score on an aptitude test,
rendering a certain minimum score not necessary if it does not measure
minimum qualifications.166 In a subsequent case, however, the Third Circuit
recognized that Title VII does not require an employer to choose someone less
qualified (as opposed to unqualified) in the name of nondiscrimination and
noted that aptitude tests can be legitimate hiring tools if they accurately
measure a persons qualifications.167 The court concluded:
159. Legislative history was no help either. The sole piece of legislative history is an
interpretive memorandum that specifies that the standards were to revert to before Wards Cove,
coupled with an explicit instruction in the Act to ignore any other legislative history regarding business
necessity. Susan S. Grover, The Business Necessity Defense in Disparate Impact Discrimination
Cases, 30 GA. L. REV. 387, 39293 (1996).
160. Andrew C. Spiropoulos, Defining the Business Necessity Defense to the Disparate Impact
Cause of Action: Finding the Golden Mean, 74 N.C. L. REV. 1479, 1484 (1996).
161. Though courts generally state the standard to reflect this middle position, the Supreme
Courts latest word on disparate impactin which the Court reaffirmed the doctrine generally and
held that it applied in the Fair Housing Actincluded the decidedly defendant-friendly observation
that private policies are not contrary to the disparate-impact requirement unless they are artificial,
arbitrary, and unnecessary barriers. Tex. Dept of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys.
Project, Inc.,135 S. Ct. 2507, 2512 (2015) (quoting Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431
(1971)).
162. See, e.g., Gallagher v. Magner, 619 F.3d 823, 834 (8th Cir. 2010); Anderson v.
Westinghouse Savannah River Co., 406 F.3d 248, 265 (4th Cir. 2005).
163. Gulino v. N.Y. State Educ. Dept, 460 F.3d 361, 383 (2d Cir. 2006) (noting that hiring
criteria are significantly correlated with important elements of work behavior which comprise or are
relevant to the job or jobs for which candidates are being evaluated (quoting Albemarle Paper Co. v.
Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 431 (1975))).
164. El v. Se. Pa. Transp. Auth., 479 F.3d 232, 242 (3d Cir. 2007) (quoting Lanning v. Se. Pa.
Transp. Auth., 181 F.3d 478, 481 (3d Cir. 1999)).
165. Michael T. Kirkpatrick, Employment Testing: Trends and Tactics, 10 EMP. RTS. & EMP.
POLY J. 623, 633 (2006).
166. Id. Note, though, that this is similar to arguing that there is a less discriminatory alternative
employment practice. This argument, then, would place the burden of the alternative employment
practice prong on the defendant, contravening the burden-shifting scheme in the statute. See infra
notes 17074 and accompanying text.
167. El, 479 F.3d at 242.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

705

Putting these standards together, then, we require that employers show
that a discriminatory hiring policy accuratelybut not perfectly
ascertains an applicants ability to perform successfully the job in
question. In addition, Title VII allows the employer to hire the
applicant most likely to perform the job successfully over others less
likely to do so.168
Thus, all circuits seem to accept varying levels of job-relatedness rather than
strict business necessity.169
The last piece of the disparate impact test is the alternative employment
practice prong. Shortly after Griggs, the Supreme Court decided Albemarle
Paper Co. v. Moody, holding in part that [i]f an employer does then meet the
burden of proving that its tests are job related, it remains open to the
complaining party to show that other tests or selection devices, without a
similarly undesirable racial effect, would also serve the employers legitimate
interest in efficient and trustworthy workmanship.170 This burden-shifting
scheme was codified in the 1991 Act as the alternative employment practice
requirement.171 Congress did not define the phrase, and its substantive meaning

168. Id.
169. Interestingly, it seems that many courts read identical business necessity language in the
Americans with Disabilities Act to refer to a minimum qualification standard. See, e.g., Sullivan v.
River Valley Sch. Dist., 197 F.3d 804, 811 (6th Cir. 1999) ([T]here must be significant evidence that
could cause a reasonable person to inquire as to whether an employee is still capable of performing his
job. An employees behavior cannot be merely annoying or inefficient to justify an examination;
rather, there must be genuine reason to doubt whether that employee can perform job-related
functions. (quoting 42 U.S.C.  12112(d)(4)(B))). Presumably, this is because disability, when
compared to race or sex, more immediately raises questions regarding a persons ability to perform a
job. Ironically, however, this means that disparate impact will be more tolerated where it is less likely
to be obviously justified. Christine Jolls has in fact argued that disparate impact is, to a degree,
functionally equivalent to accommodations law. Jolls, supra note 90, at 652.
170. 422 U.S. 405, 425 (1975) (quoting McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 801
(1973)).
171. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k)(1)(A) (2012). The alternative employment practice test has not
always been treated as a separate step. See, e.g., Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 490 U.S. 642,
659 (1989) (treating the alternative employment practice test as part of the business justification
phase); Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321, 332 (1977) (treating the alternative employment practice
test as a narrow tailoring requirement for the business necessity defense). The Albemarle Court,
though creating a surrebuttal and thus empowering plaintiffs, seemed to regard the purpose of
disparate impact as merely smoking out pretexts for intentional discrimination. 422 U.S. at 425; see
also Primus, supra note 98, at 537. If the Albemarle Courts approach is correct, treating the
alternative employment practice requirement as a narrow tailoring requirement does make sense, much
as the narrow tailoring requirement of strict scrutiny in equal protection serves the function of smoking
out invidious purpose. City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 493 (1989); Rubenfeld,
supra note 99, at 428.
Every circuit to address the question, though, has held that the 1991 Act returned the
doctrine to the Albemarle burden-shifting scheme. Jones v. City of Boston, 752 F.3d 38, 54 (1st Cir.
2014); Howe v. City of Akron, 723 F.3d 651, 658 (6th Cir. 2013); Tabor v. Hilti, Inc., 703 F.3d 1206,
1220 (10th Cir. 2013); Puffer v. Allstate Ins. Co., 675 F.3d 709, 717 (7th Cir. 2012); Gallagher v.
Magner, 619 F.3d 823, 833 (8th Cir. 2010); Gulino v. N.Y. State Educ. Dept, 460 F.3d 361, 382 (2d
Cir. 2006); Intl Bhd. of Elec. Workers Local Unions Nos. 605 & 985 v. Miss. Power & Light Co.,
442 F.3d 313, 318 (5th Cir. 2006); Anderson v. Westinghouse Savannah River Co., 406 F.3d 248, 277

706

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

remains uncertain. Wards Cove was the first case to use the specific phrase, so
Congresss instruction to reset the law to the preWards Cove standard is
particularly perplexing.172 The best interpretation is most likely Albemarles
reference to other tests or selection devices, without a similarly undesirable
racial effect.173 But this interpretation is slightly odd because in Albemarle,
business necessity was still somewhat strict, and it is hard to imagine a business
practice that is necessary while there exists a less discriminatory alternative
that is just as effective.174 If business necessity or job-relatedness is a less
stringent requirement, though, then the presence of the alternative employment
practice requirement does at least give it some teeth.
Now return to data mining. For now, assume a court does not apply the
strict business necessity standard but has some variation of job related in
mind (as all federal appellate courts do today).175 The threshold issue is clearly
whether the sought-after traitthe target variableis job related, regardless of
the machinery used to predict it. If the target variable is not sufficiently job
related, a business necessity defense would fail, regardless of the fact that the
decision was made by algorithm. Thus, disparate impact liability can be found
for improper care in target variable definition. For example, it would be
difficult for an employer to justify an adverse determination based on the
appearance of an advertisement suggesting a criminal record alongside the
search results for a candidates name. Sweeney found such a search to have a
disparate impact,176 and the EEOC and several federal courts have interpreted
Title VII to prohibit discrimination on the sole basis of criminal record, unless
there is a specific reason the particular conviction is related to the job.177 This
(4th Cir. 2005); Assn of Mexican-Am. Educators v. California, 231 F.3d 572, 584 (9th Cir. 2000);
EEOC v. Joes Stone Crab, Inc., 220 F.3d 1263, 1275 (11th Cir. 2000); Lanning v. Se. Pa. Transp.
Auth., 181 F.3d 478, 485 (3d Cir. 1999). The D.C. Circuit has not explicitly observed that a burdenshifting framework exists.
172. Sullivan, supra note 114, at 964; Michael J. Zimmer, Individual Disparate Impact Law:
On the Plain Meaning of the 1991 Civil Rights Act, 30 LOY. U. CHI. L.J. 473, 485 (1999).
173. Albemarle, 422 U.S. at 425; accord, e.g., Jones, 752 F.3d at 53 (citing Albemarle to find
meaning in the 1991 Acts text); Allen v. City of Chicago, 351 F.3d 306, 312 (7th Cir. 2003) (same,
but with a see also signal).
174. William R. Corbett, Fixing Employment Discrimination Law, 62 SMU L. REV. 81, 92
(2009).
175. The difference would be whether mining for a single job-related trait, rather than a holistic
ranking of good employees, is permissible at all. See infra text accompanying notes 19799.
176. Sweeney, supra note 41, at 51.
177. See El v. Se. Pa. Transp. Auth., 479 F.3d 232, 243 (3d Cir. 2007) (finding that though the
criminal record policy had a disparate impact, it satisfied business necessity in that case); Green v. Mo.
Pac. R.R., 523 F.2d 1290, 1298 (8th Cir. 1975); McCain v. United States, No. 2:14-cv-92, 2015 WL
1221257, at *17 (D. Vt. Mar. 17, 2015); EQUAL EMPT OPPORTUNITY COMMN, CONSIDERATION OF
ARREST AND CONVICTION RECORDS IN EMPLOYMENT DECISIONS UNDER TITLE VII OF THE CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 (2012), http://www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/upload/arrest_conviction.pdf
[https://perma.cc/JY47-2HVT]; see also Univ. of Tex. Sw. Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 2540
(2013) (The position set out in the EEOCs guidance and compliance manual merits respect.);
Michael Connett, Comment, Employer Discrimination Against Individuals with a Criminal Record:
The Unfulfilled Role of State Fair Employment Agencies, 83 TEMP. L. REV. 1007, 1017 & nn.8283

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

707

is true independent of the fact that the disparity is an artifact of third-party bias;
all that matters is whether the target variable is job related. In the end, though,
because determining that a business practice is not job related actually requires
a normative determination that it is instead discriminatory, courts tend to accept
most common business practices for which an employer has a plausible
story.178
Once a target variable is established as job related, the first question is
whether the model is predictive of that trait. The nature of data mining suggests
that this will be the case. Data mining is designed entirely to predict future
outcomes, and, if seeking a job-related trait, future job performance. One
commentator lamented that [f]ederal case law has shifted from a prospective
view of meritocracy to a retrospective view, thereby weakening disparate
impact law.179 The author meant that, in Griggs, the Court recognized that
education and other external factors were unequal and therefore discounted a
measure of meritocracy that looked to past achievements, in favor of
comparing the likelihood of future ones. But by the time the Court had decided
Wards Cove, it had shifted to a model of retrospective meritocracy that
presumed the legitimacy of past credentials, thus upholding the status quo.180
While data mining must take the pastrepresented by the training dataas
given, it generates predictions about workplace success that are much more
accurate than predictions based on those past credentials that disparate impact
doctrine has come to accept.181 In a hypothetical perfect case of data mining,
the available information would be rich enough that reliance on the past
information would fully predict future performance. Thus, robust data mining
would likely satisfy even the Griggs Courts standard that the models are
looking toward future job performance, not merely past credentials.
The second question asks whether the model adequately predicts what it is
supposed to predict. In the traditional context, this question arises in the case of
general aptitude tests that might end up measuring unrelated elements of
cultural awareness rather than intelligence.182 This is where the different data
(2011) (citing EQUAL EMPT OPPORTUNITY COMMN, POLICY STATEMENT ON THE ISSUE OF
CONVICTION RECORDS UNDER TITLE VII OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 (1987),
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/convict1.html [https://perma.cc/PY24-V8V7]). But see, e.g., Manley
v. Invesco, 555 Fed. Appx 344, 348 (5th Cir. 2014) (per curiam) (Persons with criminal records are
not a protected class under Title VII.).
178. Michael Selmi, Was the Disparate Impact Theory a Mistake?, 53 UCLA L. REV. 701, 753
(2006).
179. DeSario, supra note 151, at 481.
180. Id. at 493; see also infra Conclusion.
181. See Don Peck, Theyre Watching You at Work, ATLANTIC (Nov. 20, 2013),
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2013/12/theyre-watching-you-at-work/354681
[https://perma.cc/JFP8-CZKC] (discussing Googles choice to abandon traditional hiring metrics
because they are not good predictors of performance).
182. See, e.g., Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 420 F.2d 1225, 1239 n.6 (4th Cir. 1970), revd, 401
U.S. 424 (1971) (Since for generations blacks have been afforded inadequate educational
opportunities and have been culturally segregated from white society, it is no more surprising that their

708

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

mining mechanisms for discriminatory effects matter. Part I posited that proxy
discrimination optimizes correctly. So if it evidences a disparate impact, it
reflects unequal distribution of relevant traits in the real world. Therefore,
proxy discrimination will be as good a job predictor as possible given the
current shape of society. Models trained on biased samples and mislabeled
examples, on the other hand, will result in correspondingly skewed assessments
rather than reflect real-world disparities. The same effect may be present in
models that rely on insufficiently rich or insufficiently granular datasets: by
designation they do not reflect reality. These models might or might not be
considered job related, depending on whether the errors distort the outcomes
enough that the models are no longer good predictors of job performance.
The Guidelines have set forth validation procedures intended to create a
job-relatedness standard. Quantifiable tests that have a disparate impact must
be validated according to the procedures in the Guidelines if possible;
otherwise, a presumption arises that they are not job related.183 Under the
Guidelines, a showing of validity takes one of three forms: criterion-related,
content, or construct.184 Criterion-related validity consist[s] of empirical data
demonstrating that the selection procedure is predictive of or significantly
correlated with important elements of job performance.185 The relationship
between performance on the procedure and performance on the criterion
measure is statistically significant at the 0.05 level of significance. . . .186
Content validity refers to testing skills or abilities that generally are or have
been learned on the job, though not those that could be acquired in a brief
orientation.187 Construct validity refers to a test designed to measure some
innate human trait such as honesty. A user of a construct should show by
empirical evidence that the selection procedure is validly related to the
construct and that the construct is validly related to the performance of critical
or important work behavior(s).188
As a statistical predictive measure, a data mining model could be
validated by either criterion-related or construct validity, depending on the trait
being sought. Either way, there must be statistical significance showing that the
result of the model correlates to the trait (which was already determined to be
an important element of job performance). This is an exceedingly low bar for
data mining because data minings predictions necessarily rest on demonstrated
performance on intelligence tests is significantly different than whites than it is that fewer blacks
have high school diplomas.).
183. 29 C.F.R.  1607.3, 1607.5 (2015). The Guidelines also cite two categories of practices
that are unsuitable for validation: informal, unscored practices and technical infeasibility. Id.
 1607.6(B). For the latter case, the Guidelines state that the selection procedure still should be
justified somehow or another option should be chosen.
184. Id.  1607.5(B).
185. Id.
186. Id.  1607.14(B)(5).
187. Id.  1607.5(F), 1607.14(C).
188. Id.  1607.14(D)(3).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

709

statistical relationships. Data mining will likely only be used if it is actually
predictive of something, so the business necessity defense solely comes down
to whether the trait sought is important enough to job performance to justify its
use in any context.
Even assuming the Guidelines validation requirement is a hurdle for data
mining, some courts ignore the Guidelines recommendation that an
unvalidated procedure be rejected, preferring to rely on common sense or
finding a manifest relationship between the criteria and successful job
performance.189 Moreover, it is possible that the Supreme Court inadvertently
overruled the Guidelines in 2009. In Ricci v. Destefano, a case that will be
discussed in greater detail in Part III.B, the Court found no genuine dispute that
the tests at issue met the job-related and business necessity standards190 despite
not having been validated under the Guidelines and despite the employer
actively denying that they could be validated.191 While the business necessity
defense was not directly at issue in Ricci, [o]n the spectrum between heavier
and lighter burdens of justification, the Court came down decidedly in favor of
a lighter burden.192
Thus, there is good reason to believe that any or all of the data mining
models predicated on legitimately job-related traits pass muster under the
business necessity defense. Models trained on biased samples, mislabeled
examples, and limited features, however, might trigger liability under the
alternative employment practice prong. If a plaintiff can show that an
alternative, less discriminatory practice that accomplishes the same goals exists
and that the employer refuses to use it, the employer can be found liable. In
this case, a plaintiff could argue that the obvious alternative employment
practice would be to fix the problems with the models.
Fixing the models, however, is not a trivial task. For example, in the
LinkedIn hypothetical, where the demonstrated interest in different kinds of
employees reflects employers prejudice, LinkedIn is the party that determines
the algorithm by which the discrimination occurs (in this case, based on
reacting to third-party preferences). If an employer were to act on the
recommendations suggested by the LinkedIn recommendation engine, there
189. Wax, supra note 146, at 63334.
190. David A. Drachsler, Assessing the Practical Repercussions of Ricci, AM. CONST. SOCY
BLOG (July 27, 2009), http://www.acslaw.org/node/13829 [https://perma.cc/AH9G-B3GN] (observing
that the Court in Ricci v. DeStefano found no genuine dispute that the unvalidated tests at issue met the
job-related and business necessity standards despite the Guidelines creating a presumption of
invalidity for unvalidated tests that are discriminatory).
191. New Havens primary argument was that it had to withdraw the tests or it would have
faced Title VII liability. See Mark S. Brodin, Ricci v. DeStefano: The New Haven Firefighters Case &
the Triumph of White Privilege, 20 S. CAL. REV. L. & SOC. JUST. 161, 178 n.128 (2011) (New Haven
forcefully argued throughout the litigation that the exams were flawed and may not have identified
the most qualified candidates for the supervisory positions.).
192. George Rutherglen, Ricci v. Destefano: Affirmative Action and the Lessons of Adversity,
2009 SUP. CT. REV. 83, 107.

710

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

would not be much he could do to make it less reflective of third-party
prejudice, aside from calling LinkedIn and asking nicely. Thus, it could not
really be said that the employer refuses to use an alternative employment
practice. The employer could either use the third-party tool or not. Similarly, it
might be possible to fix an app like Street Bump that suffers from reporting
bias, but the employer would need access to the raw input data in order to do
so.193 In the case of insufficiently rich or granular features, the employer would
need to collect more data in order to make the model more discerning. But
collecting more data can be time consuming and costly,194 if not impossible for
legal or technical reasons.
Moreover, the under- and overrepresentation of members of protected
classes in data is not always evident, nor is the mechanism by which such
under- or overrepresentation occurs. The idea that the representation of
different social groups in the dataset can be brought into proportions that better
match those in the real world presumes that analysts have some independent
mechanism for determining these proportions. Thus, there are several hurdles
to finding disparate impact liability for models employing data that under- or
overrepresents members of protected classes. The plaintiff must prove that the
employer created or has access to the model, can discover that there is
discriminatory effect, and can discover the particular mechanism by which that
effect operates. The same can be said for models with insufficiently rich feature
sets. Clearly there are times when more features would improve an otherwise
discriminatory outcome. But it is, almost by definition, hard to know which
features are going to make the model more or less discriminatory. Indeed, it is
often impossible to know which features are missing because data miners do
not operate with causal relationships in mind. So while theoretically a less
discriminatory alternative would almost always exist, proving it would be
difficult.
There is yet another hurdle. Neither Congress nor courts have specified
what it means for an employer to refuse to adopt the less discriminatory
procedure. Scholars have suggested that perhaps the employer cannot be held
liable until it has considered the alternative and rejected it.195 Thus, if the
employer has run an expensive data collection and analysis operation without
ever being made aware of its any discriminatory tendencies, and the employer
cannot afford to re-run the entire operation, is the employer refusing to use a
less discriminatory alternative, or does one simply not exist? How much would
the error correction have to cost an employer before it is not seen as a refusal to
use the procedure?196 Should the statute actually be interpreted to mean that an

193. See infra Part III.B.1.
194. See generally Dalessandro, Perlich & Raeder, supra note 68.
195. Sullivan, supra note 114, at 964; Zimmer, supra note 172, at 50506.
196. For a discussion of courts using cost as a rationale here, see Ernest F. Lidge III, Financial
Costs as a Defense to an Employment Discrimination Claim, 58 ARK. L. REV. 1, 3237 (2005).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

711

employer unreasonably refuses to use an alternative employment practice?
These are all difficult questions, but suffice it to say, the prospect of winning a
data mining discrimination case on alternative employment practice grounds
seems slim.
The third and final consideration regarding disparate impact liability for
data mining is whether a court or Congress might reinvigorate strict business
necessity.197 In that case, things look a little better for plaintiffs bringing
disparate impact claims. Where an employer models job tenure,198 for example,
a court may be inclined to hold that it is job related because the model is a
legitimate, non-discriminatory business objective.199 But it is clearly not
necessary to the job. The same reasoning applies to mining for any single trait
that is job relatedthe practice of data mining is not focused on discovering
make-or-break skills. Unless the employer can show that below the cut score,
employees cannot do the work, then the strict business necessity defense will
fail. Thus, disparate impact that occurs as an artifact of the problemspecification stage can potentially be addressed by strict business necessity.
This reasoning is undermined, though, where employers do not mine for a
single trait, but automate their decision process by modeling job performance
on a holistic measure of what makes good employees. If employers determine
traits of a good employee by simple ratings, and use data mining to
appropriately divine good employees characteristics among several different
variables, then the argument that the model does not account for certain skills
that could compensate for the employees failings loses its force. Taken to an
extreme, an 8,000-feature holistic determination of a good employee would
still not be strictly necessary. Holding a business to such a standard,
however, would simply be forbidding that business from ranking candidates if
any disparate impact results. Thus, while the strict business necessity defense
could prevent myopic employers from creating disparate impacts by their
choice of target variable, it would still not address forms of data mining that
model general job performance rather than predict specific traits.
Disparate impact doctrine was created to address unintentional
discrimination. But it strikes a delicate balance between allowing businesses
the leeway to make legitimate business judgments and preventing artificial,
arbitrary, and unnecessary discrimination.200 Successful data mining
operations will often both predict future job performance and have some

197. This would likely require Congressional action because strict business necessity essentially
transfers the burden to prove a lack of an alternative employment practice to the defense. By
implication, if a practice is necessary, there cannot be alternatives. The statute, as it reads now,
clearly states that the plaintiff has the burden for that prong. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k)(1)(A)(ii) (2012).
198. This is an increasingly common practice in low-wage, high-turnover jobs. See Peck, supra
note 181.
199. Equal Empt Opportunity Commn v. Joes Stone Crab, Inc., 220 F.3d 1263, 1275 (11th
Cir. 2000); see also Gallagher v. Magner, 619 F.3d 823, 834 (8th Cir. 2010).
200. Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431 (1971).

712

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

disparate impact. Unless the plaintiff can find an alternative employment
practice to realistically point to, a tie goes to the employer.
C. Masking and Problems of Proof
Masking poses separate problems for finding Title VII liability. As
discussed earlier, there is no theoretical problem with finding liability for
masking.201 It is a disparate treatment violation as clear as any. But like
traditional forms of intentional discrimination, it suffers from difficulties of
proof. While finding intent from stray remarks or other circumstantial evidence
is challenging in any scenario, masking presents additional complications for
detection.
Data mining allows employers who wish to discriminate on the basis of a
protected class to disclaim any knowledge of the protected class in the first
instance while simultaneously inferring such details from the data. An
employer may want to discriminate by using proxies for protected classes, such
as in the case of redlining.202 Due to housing segregation, neighborhood is a
good proxy for race and can be used to redline candidates without reference to
race.203 This is a relatively unsophisticated example, however. It is possible that
some combination of musical tastes,204 stored likes on Facebook,205 and
network of friends206 will reliably predict membership in protected classes. An
employer can use these traits to discriminate by setting up future models to sort
by these items and then disclaim any knowledge of such proxy manipulation.
More generally, as discussed in Part I, any of the mechanisms by which
unintentional discrimination can occur can also be employed intentionally. The
example described above is intentional discrimination by proxy, but it is also
possible to intentionally bias the data collection process, purposefully mislabel
examples, or deliberately use an insufficiently rich set of features,207 though
some of these would probably require a great deal of sophistication. These
methods of intentional discrimination will look, for all intents and purposes,
identical to the unintentional discrimination that can result from data mining.
Therefore, detecting discrimination in the first instance will require the same
techniques as detecting unintentional discrimination, namely a disparate impact
analysis. Further, assuming there is no circumstantial evidence like an
employers stray remarks with which to prove intent, a plaintiff might attempt

201. See supra text accompanying notes 10607.
202. See supra Part I.E.
203. See MASSEY & DENTON, supra note 73, at 5152.
204. Croll, supra note 88.
205. Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell & Thore Graepel, Private Traits and Attributes Are
Predictable from Digital Records of Human Behavior, 110 PROC. NATL ACAD. SCI. 5802 (2013).
206. Carter Jernigan & Behram F.T. Mistree, Gaydar: Facebook Friendships Expose Sexual
Orientation, FIRST MONDAY (Oct. 5, 2009), http://firstmonday.org/article/view/2611/2302
[https://perma.cc/G36G-S26X].
207. See Dwork et al., supra note 81, app. at 226 (Catalog of Evils).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

713

to prove intent by demonstrating that the employer is using less representative
data, poorer examples, or fewer and less granular features than he might
otherwise use were he interested in the best possible candidate. That is, one
could show that the neutral employment practice is a pretext by demonstrating
that there is a more predictive alternative.
This looks like disparate impact analysis. A plaintiff proving masked
intentional discrimination asks the same question as in the alternative
employment practice prong: whether there were more relevant measures the
employer could have used.208 But the business necessity defense is not
available in a disparate treatment case,209 so alternative employment practice is
not the appropriate analysis. Scholars have noted, though, that the line between
disparate treatment and disparate impact in traditional Title VII cases is not
always clear,210 and sometimes employer actions can be legitimately
categorized as either or both.211 As Professor George Rutherglen has pointed
out, Concrete issues of proof, more than any abstract theory, reveal the
fundamental similarity between claims of intentional discrimination and those
of disparate impact. The evidence submitted to prove one kind of claim
invariably can be used to support the other.212 Rutherglens point is exactly
what must happen in the data mining context: disparate treatment and disparate
impact become essentially the same thing from an evidentiary perspective.
To the extent that disparate impact and treatment are, in reality, different
theories, they are often confused for each other. Plaintiffs will raise both types
of claims as a catch-all because they cannot be sure on which theory they might
win, so both theories will be in play in a given case.213 As a result, courts often
seek evidence of state of mind in disparate impact cases214 and objective,
statistical evidence in disparate treatment cases.215 Assuming the two theories
are not functionally the same, using the same evidence for disparate treatment
and disparate impact will only lead to more confusion and, as a result, more
uncertainty within the courts. Thus, despite its clear nature as a theoretical
violation, it is less clear that a plaintiff will be able to win a masking disparate
treatment case.
A final point is that traditionally, employers who do not want to
discriminate go to great lengths to avoid raising the prospect that they have
208. Cf. Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 425 (1975) (creating an alternative
employment practice prong for the purpose of rooting out pretext).
209. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(k)(2) (2012).
210. George Rutherglen, Disparate Impact, Discrimination, and the Essentially Contested
Concept of Equality, 74 FORDHAM L. REV. 2313, 2313 (2006); Stacy E. Seicshnaydre, Is the Road to
Disparate Impact Paved with Good Intentions?: Stuck on State of Mind in Antidiscrimination Law, 42
WAKE FOREST L. REV. 1141, 114243 (2007).
211. Rutherglen, supra note 210, at 232021.
212. Id. at 2320.
213. Seicshnaydre, supra note 210, at 114748.
214. Id. at 115363.
215. Rutherglen, supra note 210, at 232122.

714

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

violated the law. Thus they tend to avoid collecting information about attributes
that reveal an individuals membership in a protected class. Employers even
pay third parties to collect relatively easy-to-find information on job applicants,
such as professional honors and awards, as well as compromising photos,
videos, or membership in online groups, so that the third party can send back a
version of the report that remove[s] references to a persons religion, race,
marital status, disability and other information protected under federal
employment laws.216 This allows employers to honestly disclaim any
knowledge of the protected information. Nonetheless, if an employer seeks to
discriminate according to protected classes, she would be able to infer class
membership from the data. Thus, employers old defense to suspicion of
discriminationthat they did not even see the informationis no longer
adequate to separate would-be intentional discriminators from employers that
do not intend to discriminate.
III.
THE DIFFICULTY FOR REFORMS
While each of the mechanisms for discrimination in data mining presents
difficulties for Title VII as currently written, there are also certain obstacles to
reforming Title VII to address the resulting problems. Computer scientists and
others are working on technical remedies,217 so to say that there are problems
with legal remedies does not suggest that the problems with discrimination in
data mining cannot be solved at all. Nonetheless, this Part focuses on the legal
aspects. As it illustrates, even assuming that the political will to reform Title
VII exists, potential legal solutions are not straightforward.
This Part discusses two types of difficulties with reforming Title VII.
First, there are issues internal to the data mining process that make legal reform
difficult. For example, the subjectivity in defining a good employee is
unavoidable, but, at the same time, some answers are clearly less
discriminatory than others.218 How does one draw that line? Can employers
gain access to the additional data necessary to correct for collection bias? How
much will it cost them to find it? How do we identify the correct baseline
historical data to avoid reproducing past prejudice or the correct level of
detail and granularity in a dataset? Before laws can be reformed, policy-level
answers to these basic technical, philosophical, and economic questions need to
be addressed at least to some degree.

216. Jennifer Preston, Social Media History Becomes a New Job Hurdle, N.Y. TIMES (July 20,
2011),
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/21/technology/social-media-history-becomes-a-new-jobhurdle.html [https://perma.cc/NZ8U-M296].
217. For a list of the wide-ranging research underway in computer science, see generally
Resources, FAT ML, http://www.fatml.org/resources.html [https://perma.cc/T2QW-ARHX].
218. See supra Part I.A.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

715

Second, reform will face political and constitutional constraints external
to the logic of data mining that will affect how Title VII can be permissibly
reformed to address it. Not all of the mechanisms for discrimination seem to be
amenable to procedural remedies. If that holds true, only after-the-fact
reweighting of results may be able to compensate for the discriminatory
outcomes. This is not a matter of missing legislation; it is a matter of practical
reality. Unfortunately, while in many cases no procedural remedy will be
sufficient, any attempt to design a legislative or judicial remedy premised on
reallocation of employment outcomes will not survive long in the current
political or constitutional climate, as it raises the specter of affirmative action.
Politically, anything that even hints at affirmative action is a nonstarter today,
and to the extent that it is permissible to enact such policies, their future
constitutionality is in doubt.219
A. Internal Difficulties
1. Defining the Target Variable
Settling on a target variable is a necessarily subjective exercise.220
Disputes over the superiority of competing definitions are often insoluble
because the target variables are themselves incommensurable. There are, of
course, easier cases, where prejudice or carelessness leads to definitions that
subject members of protected classes to avoidably high rates of adverse
determinations. But most cases are likely to involve genuine business
disagreements over ideal definitions, with each having a potentially greater or
lesser impact on protected classes. There is no stable ground upon which to
judge the relative merits of definitions because they often reflect competing
ideas about the very nature of the problem at issue.221 As Professor Oscar
Gandy has argued, [C]ertain kind[s] of biases are inherent in the selection of
the goals or objective functions that automated systems will [be] designed to
support.222 There is no escape from this situation; a target variable must reflect
judgments about what really is the problem at issue in making hiring decisions.
For certain employers, it might be rather obvious that the problem is one of
reducing the administrative costs associated with turnover and training; for
others, it might be improving sales; for still others, it might be increasing
219. See Lyle Denniston, Argument Analysis: Now, Three Options on College Affirmative
Action, SCOTUSBLOG (Dec. 9, 2015, 2:47 PM), http://www.scotusblog.com/2015/12/argumentanalysis-now-three-options-on-college-affirmative-action [https://perma.cc/XF75-N82F] (analysis of
oral argument in Fisher v. Univ. of Tex., 758 F.3d 633 (5th Cir. 2014), cert. granted, 135 S. Ct. 2888,
(June 29, 2015)); see also Fisher v. Univ. of Tex., 133 S. Ct. 2411, 2419 (2013) ([A]ny official action
that treats a person differently on account of his race or ethnic origin is inherently suspect. (internal
citation omitted)).
220. See supra Part I.A.
221. See David J. Hand, Deconstructing Statistical Questions, 157 J. ROYAL STAT. SOCY.
SERIES A (STAT. SOCY) 317, 31820 (1994).
222. Gandy, supra note 31, at 39.

716

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

innovation. Any argument for the superiority of one target variable over the
other will simply make appeals to competing and incommensurate values.
For these same reasons, however, defining the target variable also offers
an opportunity for creative thinking about the potentially infinite number of
ways of making sound hiring decisions. Data miners can experiment with
multiple definitions that each seem to serve the same goal, even if these fall
short of what they themselves consider ideal. In principle, employers should
rely on proxies that are maximally proximate to the actual skills demanded of
the job. While there should be a tight nexus between the sought-after features
and these skills, this may not be possible for practical and economic reasons.
This leaves data miners in a position to dream up many different nonideal ways
to make hiring decisions that may have a greater or less adverse impact on
protected classes.
The Second Circuit considered such an approach in Hayden v. County of
Nassau.223 In Hayden, the countys goal was to find a police entrance exam that
was valid, yet minimized the adverse impact on minority applicants.224 The
county thus administered an exam with twenty-five parts that could be scored
independently. By design, a statistically valid result could be achieved by one
of several configurations that counted only a portion of the test sections,
without requiring all of them.225 The county ended up using nine of the sections
as a compromise, after rejecting one configuration that was more advantageous
to minority applicants but less statistically sound.226 This is a clear example of
defining a problem in such a way that it becomes possible to reduce the
disparate impact without compromising the accuracy of the assessment
mechanism.
2. Training Data
a.

Labeling Examples

Any solution to the problems presented by labeling must be a compromise
between a rule that forbids employers from relying on past discrimination and
one that allows them to base hiring decisions on historical examples of good
employees. In theory, a rule that forbids employers from modeling decisions
based on historical examples tainted by prejudice would address the problem of
improper labeling. But if the only examples an employer has to draw on are
those of past employees who had been subject to discrimination, all learned
rules will recapitulate this discrimination.
Title VII has always had to balance its mandate to eliminate
discrimination in the workplace with employers legitimate discretion. For
223.
224.
225.
226.

180 F.3d 42, 47 (2d Cir. 1999).
Id.
Id.
Id.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

717

example, one of the most common selection procedures that explicitly
reproduced past discrimination was seniority.227 Seniority was, and is still
often, a legitimate metric for promotion and is especially important in
collective bargaining. After the passage of Title VII, however, seniority was
also often used to keep black people from advancing to better jobs because they
had not been hired until Title VII forced employers to hire them.228 Despite this
obvious problem with seniority, Title VII contains an explicit carve-out for
bona fide seniority or merit system[s].229 As a result, the Supreme Court has
held that absent a discriminatory purpose, the operation of a seniority system
cannot be an unlawful employment practice even if the system has some
discriminatory consequences.230 Given the inherent tension between ensuring
that past discrimination is not reproduced in future decisions and permitting
employers legitimate discretion, it should be unsurprising that, when translated
to data mining, the problem is not amenable to a clear solution.
In fact, this difficulty is even more central to data mining. Data miners
who attempt to remove the influence of prejudice on prior decisions by
recoding or relabeling examples may find that they cannot easily resolve what
the nonprejudicial determination would have been. As Calders and liobait
point out, [T]he notion of what is the correct label is fuzzy.231 Employers are
unlikely to have perfectly objective and exhaustive standards for hiring; indeed,
part of the hiring process is purposefully subjective. At the same time,
employers are unlikely to have discriminated so completely in the past that the
only explanation for rejecting an applicant was membership in protected
classes. This leaves data miners tasked with correcting for prior prejudice with
the impossible challenge of determining what the correct subjective
employment decision would have been absent prejudice. Undoing the imprint
of prejudice on the data may demand a complete rerendering of the biased
decisions rather than simply adjusting those decisions according to some fixed
statistical measure.
b.

Data Collection

Although there are some cases with obviously skewed datasets that are
relatively easy to identify and correct, often the source and degree of the bias
will not be immediately apparent.232 Street Bump suffered from a visually

227. Selmi, supra note 178, at 715.
228. See Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 450 (1975) (Burger, J., concurring)
(The basis of Albemarles liability was that its seniority system perpetuated the effects of past
discrimination . . . .).
229. 42 U.S.C.  2000e-2(h) (2012).
230. Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63, 82 (1977).
231. Calders & liobait, supra note 64, at 48.
232. For example, establishing whether and to what extent crime statistics misrepresent the
relative proportion of offenses committed by different social groups is not an easy task. Especially
challenging are those crimes that are more likely to go under- or unreported if not directly observed by

718

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

evident bias when the data was plotted on a map. Bostons Office of New
Urban Mechanics was therefore able to partner with a range of academics to
take into account issues of equitable access and digital divides.233 In many
cases, however, an analyst can only determine the extent ofand correct for
unintentional discrimination that results from reporting, sampling, and selection
biases if the analyst has access to information that somehow reveals
misrepresentations of protected classes in the dataset. Often, there may be no
practical alternative method for collecting information that would even reveal
the existence of a bias.
Any attempt to correct for collection bias immediately confronts the
problem of whether or not the employer recognizes the specific type of bias
that is producing disparate results. Then, in order to correct for it, an employer
must have access to the underlying data and often an ability to collect more.
Where more data is clearly not accessible, data miners can proactively
compensate for some of the bias by oversampling underrepresented
communities.234
If the employer fails to be proactive or tries and fails to detect the bias that
causes the disparate impact, liability is an open question. As discussed in
Part II.B, liability partly depends on how liberally a court interprets the
requirement that an employer refuses to use an alternative scheme.235 Even a
liberal interpretation, though, would require evidence of the particular type of
discrimination at issue, coupled with evidence that such an alternative scheme
exists. Thus, finding liability seems unlikely. Worse, where such showing is
possible, there may be no easy or obvious way to remedy the situation.
To address collection bias directly, an employer or an auditor must have
access to the underlying data and the ability to adjust the model. Congress
could require this directly of any employer using data mining techniques. Some
employers are investing in their own data now and could potentially meet such
requirements.236 But employers also seem happy to rely on models developed
and administered by third parties, who may have a far greater set of examples
and far richer data than any individual company.237 Furthermore, due to
economies of scale that are especially important in data analysis, one can
imagine that third parties specializing in work-force science will be able to
offer employers this service much less expensively than they could manage it

the police. See BERNARD E. HARCOURT, AGAINST PREDICTION: PROFILING, POLICING, AND
PUNISHING IN AN ACTUARIAL AGE (2007).
233. Kate Crawford, The Hidden Biases in Big Data, HARV. BUS. REV. (Apr. 1, 2013),
https://hbr.org/2013/04/the-hidden-biases-in-big-data
[https://perma.cc/9A7V-3UVD].
Such
techniques would also address the concerns raised in Lerman, supra note 50.
234. Faisal Kamiran & Toon Calders, Data Preprocessing Techniques for Classification
Without Discrimination, 33 KNOWLEDGE & INFO. SYS. 1, 3 (2011).
235. See supra Part II.B.
236. Peck, supra note 181.
237. See Richtel, supra note 69.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

719

themselves. If Congress attempted to demand that employers have access to the
data, it would face strong resistance from the ever-growing data analysis
industry, whose business depends on the proprietary nature of the amassed
information. More likely, Congress could require audits by a third party like the
EEOC or a private auditor, in order to protect trade secrets, but this still seems
a tall task. Ultimately, because proactive oversampling and retroactive data
correction are at least possible, collection bias has the most promising
prospects for a workable remedy of any of the identified data mining
mechanisms.
3. Feature Selection
Even in the absence of prejudice or bias, determining the proper degree of
precision in the distinctions drawn through data mining can be extremely
difficult. Under formal disparate treatment, this is straightforward: any decision
that expressly classifies by membership in a protected class is one that draws
distinctions on illegitimate grounds. It is far less clear, however, what
constitutes legitimate statistical discrimination when individuation does not
rely on proscribed criteria. In these cases, the perceived legitimacy seems to
depend on a number of factors: (1) whether the errors seem avoidable because
(2) gaining access to additional or more granular data would be trivial or
(3) would not involve costs that (4) outweigh the benefits. This seems to
suggest that the task of evaluating the legitimacy of feature selection can be
reduced to a rather straightforward cost-benefit analysis. Companies would
have an obligation to pursue ever moreand more granulardata until the
costs of gathering that data exceed the benefits conferred by the marginal
improvements in accuracy.
Unfortunately, as is often the case with cost-benefit analyses, this
approach fails to consider how different actors will perceive the value of the
supposed benefits as well as the costs associated with errors. The obvious
version of this criticism is that actuarially saddled victims of inaccurate
determinations may find cold comfort in the fact that certain decisions are
rendered more reliably overall when decision makers employ data mining.238 A
more sophisticated version of this criticism focuses on the way such errors
assign costs and benefits to different actors at systematically different rates. A
model with any error rate that continues to turn a profit may be acceptable to
decision makers at a company, no matter the costs or inconvenience to specific
customers.239 Even when companies are subject to market pressures that would

238. SCHAUER, supra note 67, at 5. As Schauer explains, perfectly particularized decisions are,
of course, a logical impossibility. Accepting this inherent limitation introduces a different sort of
procedural concern: occasional errors might be tolerable if they are easy to detect and rectify, which is
why, among other things, the perceived legitimacy of decisions often also depends on due process. See
id. at 172; see also Citron, supra note 11.
239. Gandy, supra note 31, at 36.

720

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

force them to compete by lowering these error rates, the companies may find
that there is simply no reason to invest in efforts that do so if the errors happen
to fall disproportionately on especially unprofitable groups of consumers.
Furthermore, assessing data mining as a matter of balancing costs and benefits
leaves no room to consider morally salient disparities in the degree to which
the costs are borne by different social groups. This raises the prospect that there
might be systematic differences in the rates at which members of protected
classes are subject to erroneous determinations.240 Condemning these groups to
bear the disproportionate burden of erroneous determinations would strike
many as highly objectionable, despite greater accuracy in decision making for
the majority group.241 Indeed, simply accepting these cost differences as a
given would subject those already in less favorable circumstances to less
accurate determinations.
Even if companies assume the responsibility for ensuring that members of
protected classes do not fall victim to erroneous determinations at
systematically higher rates, they could find that increasing the resolution and
range of their analyses still fails to capture the causal relationships that account
for different outcomes because those relationships are not easily represented in
data.242 In such cases, rather than reducing the error rate for those in protected
classes, data miners could structure their analyses to minimize the difference in
error rates between groups. This solution may involve some unattractive
tradeoffs, however. In reducing the disparate impact of errors, it may increase
the overall amount of errors. In other words, generating a model that is equally
unfair to protected and unprotected classes might increase the overall amount
of unfairness.
4. Proxies
Computer scientists have been unsure how to deal with redundant
encodings in datasets. Simply withholding these variables from the data mining
exercise often removes criteria that hold demonstrable and justifiable relevance
to the decision at hand. As Calders and liobait note, [I]t is problematic [to
remove a correlated attribute] if the attribute to be removed also carries some
objective information about the label [quality of interest].243 Part of the
problem seems to be that there is no obvious way to determine how correlated a
relevant attribute must be with class membership to be worrisome. Nor is there
a self-evident way to determine when an attribute is sufficiently relevant to
justify its consideration, despite its high correlation with class membership. As

240. Moritz Hardt, How Big Data Is Unfair, MEDIUM (Sept. 26, 2014),
https://medium.com/@mrtz/how-big-data-is-unfair-9aa544d739de [https://perma.cc/YN44-M4DQ].
241. See, e.g., Gandy, supra note 31, at 39.
242. See supra note 64 and accompanying text.
243. Calders & liobait, supra note 64, at 54.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

721

Professors Devin Pope and Justin Sydnor explain, [V]ariables are likely
neither solely predictive nor purely proxies for omitted characteristics.244
But there is a bigger problem here: attempting to ensure fairly rendered
decisions by excising highly correlated criteria only makes sense if the
disparate impact happens to be an avoidable artifact of a particular way of
rendering decisions. And yet, even when denied access to these highly
correlated criteria, data mining may suggest alternative methods for rendering
decisions that still result in the same disparate impact. Focusing on isolated
data points may be a mistake because class membership can be encoded in
more than one specific and highly correlated criterion. Indeed, it is very likely
that class membership is reflected across a number of interrelated data
points.245 But such outcomes might instead demonstrate something more
unsettling: that other relevant criteria, whatever they are, happen to be
possessed at different rates by members of protected classes. This explains
why, for instance, champions of predictive policing have responded to critics
by arguing that [i]f you wanted to remove everything correlated with race, you
couldnt use anything. Thats the reality of life in America.246 Making
accurate determinations means considering factors that are somehow correlated
with proscribed features.
Computer scientists have even shown that [r]emoving all such correlated
attributes before training does remove discrimination, but with a high cost in
classifier accuracy.247 This reveals a rather uncomfortable truth: the current
distribution of relevant attributesattributes that can and should be taken into
consideration in apportioning opportunities fairlyis demonstrably correlated
with sensitive attributes because the sensitive attributes have meaningfully
conditioned what relevant attributes individuals happen to possess.248 As such,
attempts to ensure procedural fairness by excluding certain criteria from
consideration may conflict with the imperative to ensure accurate
determinations. The only way to ensure that decisions do not systematically
disadvantage members of protected classes is to reduce the overall accuracy of

244. Devin G. Pope & Justin R. Sydnor, Implementing Anti-Discrimination Policies in
Statistical Profiling Models, 3 AM. ECON. J. 206, 206 (2011).
245. Supra discussion accompanying note 101.
246. Labi, supra note 5 (quoting Ellen Kurtz, Director of Research for Philadelphias Adult
Probation and Parole Department).
247. Toon Calders & Sicco Verwer, Presentation at the European Conference on Machine
Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Three Nave Bayes
Approaches
for
Discrimination-Free
Classification
9
(2010),
http://wwwis.win.tue.nl/~tcalders/dadm/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=ecmlpkdd_2010_discrimination.pdf
[http://perma.cc/9V72-2NVM].
248. In a sense, computer scientists have unwittingly furnished the kind of evidence that social
scientists routinely seek: the particular contours of inequality. See, e.g., SOCIAL INEQUALITY (Kathryn
M. Neckerman ed., 2004).

722

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

all determinations. As Dwork et al. remark, these results demonstrate a
quanti[t]ative trade-off between fairness and utility.249
In certain contexts, data miners will never be able to fully disentangle
legitimate and proscribed criteria. For example, the workforce optimization
consultancy, Evolv, discovered that [d]istance between home and work . . . is
strongly associated with employee engagement and retention.250 Despite the
strength of this finding, Evolv never factor[s] [it] into the score given each
applicant . . . because different neighborhoods and towns can have different
racial profiles, which means that scoring distance from work could violate
equal-employment-opportunity standards.251 Scholars have taken these cases
as a sign that the major challenge is how to find out which part of information
carried by a sensitive (or correlated) attribute is sensitive and which is
objective.252 While researchers are well aware that this may not be easy to
resolve, let alone formalize into a computable problem, there is a bigger
challenge from a legal perspective: any such undertaking would necessarily
wade into the highly charged debate over the degree to which the relatively less
favorable position of protected classes warrants the protection of
antidiscrimination law in the first instance.
The problems that render data mining discriminatory are very rarely
amenable to obvious, complete, or welcome resolution. When it comes to
setting a target variable and feature selection, policy cannot lay out a clear path
to improvement; reducing the disparate impact will necessitate open-ended
exploration without any way of knowing when analysts have exhausted the
possibility for improvement. Likewise, policies that compel institutions to
correct tainted datasets or biased samples will make impossible demands of
analysts. In most cases, they will not be able to determine what the objective
determination should have been or independently observe the makeup of the
entire population. Dealing with both of these problems will ultimately fall to
analysts considered judgment. Solutions that reduce the accuracy of decisions
to minimize the disparate impact caused by coarse features and unintentional
proxies will force analysts to make difficult and legally contestable trade-offs.
General policies will struggle to offer the specific guidance necessary to
determine the appropriate application of these imperfect solutions. And even
when companies voluntarily adopt such strategies, these internal difficulties
will likely allow a disparate impact to persist.

249. Dwork et al., supra note 81, at 215; cf. Wax, supra note 146, at 711 (noting intractable
problems due to a validity-diversity tradeoff in employment metrics).
250. Peck, supra note 181.
251. Id. Other companies have not held back from considering this information for the very
same purposes. See Joseph Walker, Meet the New Boss: Big Data, WALL ST. J. (Sept. 20, 2012),
http://www.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10000872396390443890304578006252019616768
[https://perma.cc/6DHY-M429].
252. Calders & liobait, supra note 64, at 56.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

723

B. External Difficulties
Assuming the internal difficulties can be resolved, there are further
political and constitutional restraints on addressing Title VIIs inadequacies
with respect to data mining. Data mining discrimination will force a
confrontation between the two divergent principles underlying
antidiscrimination law: anticlassification and antisubordination.253 Which of
these two principles motivates discrimination law is a contentious debate, and
making remedies available under antidiscrimination law will require a
commitment to antisubordination principles that have thus far not been
forthcoming from legislatures. This is not merely a political concern, as
substantive remediation is becoming ever more suspect constitutionally as
well.254 While such remedies may be politically and legally impossible, the
nature of data mining itself makes them practically necessary. Accordingly,
these external difficulties may prevent antidiscrimination law from fully
addressing data mining discrimination.
Two competing principles have always undergirded antidiscrimination
law: anticlassification and antisubordination. Anticlassification is the narrower
of the two, holding that the responsibility of the law is to eliminate the
unfairness individuals in certain protected classes experience due to decision
makers choices.255 Antisubordination theory, in contrast, holds that the goal of
antidiscrimination law is, or at least should be, to eliminate status-based
inequality due to membership in those classes, not as a matter of procedure, but
of substance.256
Different mitigation policies effectuate different rationales. Disparate
treatment doctrine arose first, clearly aligning with the anticlassification
principle by proscribing intentional discrimination, in the form of either
explicit singling out of protected classes for harm or masked intentional
discrimination. Since disparate impact developed, however, there has never
been clarity as to which of the principles it is designed to effectuate.257 On the
one hand, disparate impact doctrine serves anticlassification by being an
evidentiary dragnet used to smoke out well-hidden disparate treatment.258
On the other hand, as an effects-based doctrine, there is good reason to believe
it was intended to address substantive inequality.259 In this sense, the business

253. Helen Norton, The Supreme Courts Post-Racial Turn Towards a Zero-Sum
Understanding of Equality, 52 WM. & MARY L. REV. 197, 20615 (2010); see also Bagenstos, supra
note 122, at 4042, 4041 nn.21415 (collecting sources); Owen M. Fiss, Groups and the Equal
Protection Clause, 5 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 107, 157 (1976).
254. See Norton, supra note 253.
255. Id. at 209.
256. Id. at 206.
257. Primus, supra note 98, at 52023.
258. Id.; Perry, supra note 138, at 526.
259. See Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 42930 (1971) (The objective of Congress
in the enactment of Title VII is plain from the language of the statute. It was to achieve equality of

724

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

necessity defense is a necessary backstop that prevents members of
traditionally disadvantaged groups from simply forcing their way in without the
necessary skills or abilities.260
Thus, the mapping from anticlassification and antisubordination to
disparate treatment and disparate impact was never clean. Early critics of civil
rights laws actually complained that proscribing consideration of protected
class was a subsidy to black people.261 This argument quickly gave way in the
face of the rising importance of the anticlassification norm.262 Over the years,
the anticlassification principle has come to dominate the landscape so
thoroughly that a portion of the populace thinks (as do a few Justices on the
Supreme Court) that it is the only valid rationale for antidiscrimination law.263
The move away from antisubordination began only five years after
disparate impact was established in Griggs. In Washington v. Davis, the Court
held that disparate impact could not apply to constitutional claims because
equal protection only prohibited intentional discrimination.264 Since then, the
various affirmative action cases have overwritten the distinction between
benign and harmful categorizations of race in favor of a formalistic
anticlassification principle, removed from its origins as a tool to help members
of historically disadvantaged groups.265 White men can now bring disparate
treatment claims.266 If antidiscrimination law is no longer thought to serve the
purpose of improving the relative conditions of traditionally disadvantaged
groups, antisubordination is not part of the equation.
While the Court has clearly established that antisubordination is not part
of constitutional equal protection doctrine, that it does not mean that
antisubordination cannot animate statutory antidiscrimination law.
Antisubordination and anticlassification came into sharp conflict in Ricci v.
Destefano, a 2009 case in which the City of New Haven refused to certify a
promotion exam given to its firefighters on the grounds that it would have
produced a disparate impact based on its results.267 The Supreme Court held
that the refusal to certify the test, a facially race-neutral attempt to correct for
perceived disparate impact, was in fact a race-conscious remedy that
constituted disparate treatment of the majority-white firefighters who would
employment opportunities and remove barriers that have operated in the past to favor an identifiable
group of white employees over other employees. Under the Act, practices, procedures, or tests neutral
on their face, and even neutral in terms of intent, cannot be maintained if they operate to freeze the
status quo of prior discriminatory employment practices.).
260. See Tex. Dept of Hous. & Cmty Aff. v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc., No. 13-1371, slip
op. at 8 (Sup. Ct. 2015) (quoting Griggs, 401 U.S. at 431).
261. Primus, supra note 98, at 52526.
262. Id.
263. See Bagenstos, supra note 122, at 41.
264. 426 U.S. 229, 24648 (1976).
265. Rubenfeld, supra note 99, at 428, 43336.
266. Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009).
267. Id.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

725

have been promoted based on the exams results.268 The Court held that
disparate treatment cannot be a remedy for disparate impact without a strong
basis in evidence that the results would lead to actual disparate treatment
liability.269
Ricci was the first indication at the Supreme Court that disparate impact
doctrine could be in conflict with disparate treatment.270 The Court had
previously ruled in essence that the antisubordination principle could not
motivate a constitutional decision,271 but it had not suggested that law
effectuating that principle could itself be discriminatory against the dominant
groups. That has now changed.272
The decision has two main consequences for data mining. First, where the
internal difficulties in resolving discrimination in data mining described above
can be overcome, legislation that requires or enables such resolution may run
afoul of Ricci. Suppose, for example, Congress amended Title VII to require
that employers make their training data and models auditable. In order to
correct for detected biases in the training data that result in a model with a
disparate impact, the employer would first have to consider membership in the
protected class. The remedy is inherently race-conscious. The Ricci Court did
hold that an employer may tweak a test during the test-design stage,
however.273 So, as a matter of timing, data mining might not formally run into
268.
269.
270.

Id.
Id. at 563.
Primus, supra note 92, at 1344; Lawrence Rosenthal, Saving Disparate Impact, 34
CARDOZO L. REV. 2157, 216263 (2013); Norton, supra note 253, at 229.
271. See Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (holding that discriminatory purpose is
necessary to finding a violation of equal protection).
272. Primus, supra note 92, at 1343. While the decision was formally about Title VII only, and
thus amenable to statutory resolution, the reasoning applied equally well to a future equal protection
claim, endangering the future of disparate impact. Id. at 138587; Bradley A. Areheart, The
Anticlassification Turn in Employment Discrimination Law, 63 ALA. L. REV. 955, 994 (2012); Norton,
supra note 253, at 22930. Justice Scalia stated as much in his concurrence. Ricci, 557 U.S. at 594
(Scalia, J., concurring) ([The Courts] resolution of this dispute merely postpones the evil day on
which the Court will have to confront the question: Whether, or to what extent, are the disparateimpact provisions of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 consistent with the Constitutions
guarantee of equal protection?). But the Supreme Court seemed to pull back from the brink last term,
approving of the use of disparate impact in a new settingthe Fair Housing Actand engaging
deeply with the constitutional issues that Ricci raised, settling them for now. Samuel R. Bagenstos,
Disparate Impact and the Role of Classification and Motivation in Equal Protection Law After
Inclusive Communities, 101 CORNELL L. REV., at *1112 (forthcoming 2016),
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2642631
[https://perma.cc/WD43-XW2G];
Richard Primus, Of Visible Race-Consciousness and Institutional Role: Equal Protection and
Disparate Impact After Ricci and Inclusive Communities, in TITLE VII OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
AFTER 50 YEARS: PROCEEDINGS OF THE NEW YORK UNIVERSITY 67TH ANNUAL CONFERENCE ON
LABOR 295 (2015).
273. Ricci, 557 U.S. at 585 (majority opinion) (Title VII does not prohibit an employer from
considering, before administering a test or practice, how to design that test or practice in order to
provide a fair opportunity for all individuals, regardless of their race. And when, during the test-design
stage, an employer invites comments to ensure the test is fair, that process can provide a common
ground for open discussions toward that end.).

726

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

Ricci if the bias resulting in a disparate impact is corrected before applied to
individual candidates. After an employer begins to use the model to make
hiring decisions, only a strong basis in evidence that the employer will be
successfully sued for disparate impact will permit corrective action.274 Of
course, unless every single model used by an employer is subject to a
prescreening audit (an idea that seems so resource intensive that it is effectively
impossible), the disparate impact will be discovered only when the employer
faces complaints. Additionally, while Riccis holding was limited in scope, the
strong basis in evidence standard did not seem to be dictated by the logic of
the opinion, which illustrated a more general conflict between disparate
treatment and disparate impact.275
Second, where the internal difficulties cannot be overcome, there is likely
no way to correct for the discriminatory outcomes aside from results-focused
balancing, and requiring this will pose constitutional problems. For those who
adhere to the anticlassification principle alone, such an impasse may be
perfectly acceptable. They might say that as long as employers are not
intentionally discriminating based on explicitly proscribed criteria, the chips
should fall where they may. To those who believe some measure of substantive
equality is important over and above procedural equality, this result will be
deeply unsatisfying.
An answer to the impasse created by situations that would require resultsfocused rebalancing is to reexamine the purpose of antidiscrimination law. The
major justification for reliance on formal disparate treatment is that prejudice is
simply irrational and thus unfair. But if an employer knows that his model has
a disparate impact, but it is also his most predictive, the argument that the
discrimination is irrational loses any force. Thus, data mining may require us to
reevaluate why and whether we care about not discriminating.
Consider another example involving tenure predictions, one in which an
employer ranks potential employees with the goal of hiring only those
applicants that the company expects to retain for longer periods of time. In
optimizing its selection of applicants in this manner, the employer may
unknowingly discriminate against women if the historical data demonstrates
that they leave their positions after fewer years than their male counterparts. If
gender accounts for a sufficiently significant difference in employee tenure,
data mining will generate a model that simply discriminates on the basis of
gender or those criteria that happen to be proxies for gender. Although
selecting applicants with an eye to retention might seem both rational and
reasonable, granting significance to predicted tenure would subject women to
systematic disadvantage if gender accounts for a good deal of the difference in
tenure. If that is the case, any data mining exercise that attempts to predict

274.
275.

Id. at 585.
See generally id.

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

727

tenure will invariably rediscover this relationship. One solution could be for
Congress to amend Title VII to reinvigorate strict business necessity.276 This
would allow a court to accept that relying on tenure is rational but not strictly
necessary and that perhaps other factors could make up for the lack of
predicted tenure.
But this solution and all others must rely on the antisubordination
principle. Consider this question: should the law permit a company to hire no
women at allor none that it correctly predicts will depart following the birth
of a childbecause it is the most rational choice according to their model?277
The answer seems obviously to be no. But why not? What forms the basis for
laws objection to rational decisions, based on seemingly legitimate criteria,
that place members of protected classes at systematic disadvantage? The
Supreme Court has observed that, Title VII requires employers to treat their
employees as individuals, not as simply components of a racial, religious,
sexual, or national class.278 On the strength of that statement, the Court held
that employers could not force women to pay more into an annuity because
they, as women, were likely to live longer.279 But it is not clear that this
reasoning translates directly to data mining. Here, the model takes a great deal
of data about an individual, and while it does make a determination based on
statistics, it will make a different one if analyzing two different women. So if
the model said to hire no women, it would be illegal, but, according to the
doctrine, perhaps only because every woman ends up with the same result.
The only escape from this situation may be one in which the relevance of
gender in the model is purposefully ignored and all factors correlated with
gender are suppressed. The outcome would be a necessarily less accurate
model. The justification for placing restrictions on employers, and limiting the
effectiveness of their data mining, would have to depend on an entirely
different set of arguments than those advanced to explain the wrongfulness of
biased data collection, poorly labeled examples, or an impoverished set of
features. Here, shielding members of protected classes from less favorable
treatment is not justified by combatting prejudice or stereotyping. In other
words, any prohibition in this case could not rest on a procedural commitment
to ensuring ever more accurate determinations. Instead, the prohibition would
have to rest on a substantive commitment to equal representation of women in
the workplace. That is, it would have to rest on a principle of antisubordination.

276. Remember that if there is disparate impact, but no liability, it is because the goal was
deemed job-related or satisfied business necessity.
277. As a matter of case law, this question has essentially been answered. The Supreme Court
has ruled that in the case of women being required to pay more into an annuity because they would
likely live longer, pure market rationality is not a good enough answer. Ariz. Governing Comm. v.
Norris, 463 U.S. 1073, 1083 (1983) (quoting City of Los Angeles Dept of Water & Power v.
Manhart, 435 U.S. 702, 708 (1978)).
278. Id.
279. Id.

728

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

The dilemma is clear: the farther the doctrine gets from substantive
remediation, the less utility it has in remedying these kinds of discriminatory
effects.280 But the more disparate impact is thought to embody the
antisubordination principleas opposed to the evidentiary dragnet in service
of the anticlassification normthe more it will invite future constitutional
challenges.281
This also raises a point about disparate treatment and data mining. Within
data mining, the effectiveness of prohibiting the use of certain information
exists on a spectrum. On one end, the prohibition has little to no effect because
either the information is redundantly encoded or the results do not vary along
lines of protected class. On the other end, the prohibition reduces the accuracy
of the models. That is, if protected class data were not prohibited, that
information would alter the results, presumably by making members of
protected classes worse (or, in some cases, better) off. Thus, as a natural
consequence of data mining, a command to ignore certain data has either no
effect282 or the effect of altering the fortunes of those protected classes in
substantive ways. Therefore, with respect to data mining, due to the zero-sum
nature of a ranking system, even disparate treatment doctrine is a reallocative
remedy similar to affirmative action.283 Once again, this erodes the legitimate
rationale for on the one hand supporting an anticlassification principle but on
the other, holding fast against antisubordination in this context. The two
principles tend to accomplish the same thing, but one is less effective at
achieving substantive equality.
This reveals that the pressing challenge does not lie with ensuring
procedural fairness through a more thorough stamping out of prejudice and bias
but rather with developing ways of reasoning to adjudicate when and what
amount of disparate impact is tolerable. Abandoning a belief in the efficacy of
procedural solutions leaves policy makers in an awkward position because
there is no definite or consensus answer to questions about the fairness of
specific outcomes. These need to be worked out on the basis of different
normative principles. At some point, society will be forced to acknowledge that
this is really a discussion about what constitutes a tolerable level of disparate
impact in employment. Under the current constitutional order and in the
political climate, it is tough to even imagine having such a conversation. But,
until that happens, data mining will be permitted to exacerbate existing
inequalities in difficult-to-counter ways.

280. Id. at 537.
281. Primus, supra note 98, at 53637.
282. See supra text accompanying note 101.
283. For an argument that this is true more generally, see Bagenstos, supra note 90, and Owen
M. Fiss, A Theory of Fair Employment Laws, 38 U. CHI. L. REV. 235, 313 (1971) (arguing that a key
to understanding antidiscrimination prohibitions in the employment realm is that the prohibitions
confer[] benefits on a racial classblacks).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

729

CONCLUSION
This Essay has identified two types of discriminatory outcomes from data
mining: a family of outcomes where data mining goes wrong and outcomes
where it goes too right. Data mining can go wrong in any number of ways. It
can choose a target variable that correlates to protected class more than others
would, reproduce the prejudice exhibited in the training examples, draw
adverse lessons about protected classes from an unrepresentative sample,
choose too small a feature set, or not dive deep enough into each feature. Each
of these potential errors is marked by two facts: the errors may generate a
manifest disparate impact, and they may be the result of entirely innocent
choices made by data miners.
Where data mining goes right, data miners could not have been any
more accurate given the starting point of the process. This very accuracy,
exposing an uneven distribution of attributes that predict the target variable,
gives such a result its disparate impact. If the data accurately models inequality,
attempts to devise an alternative way of making the same prediction will only
narrow the disparate impact if these efforts reduce the accuracy of the decision
procedure. By now, it should be clear that Title VII, and very likely other
similarly process-oriented civil rights laws, cannot effectively address this
situation.
This means something different for the two families, and it should be
slightly more surprising for the former. At a high level of abstraction, where a
decision process goes wrong and this wrongness creates a disparate impact,
Title VII and similar civil rights laws should be up to the task of solving the
problem; that is ostensibly their entire purpose. But aside from a few more
obvious cases involving manifest biases in the dataset, it is quite difficult to
determine ahead of time what correct data mining looks like. A decision
maker can rarely discover that the choice of a particular target variable is more
discriminatory than other choices until after the fact, at which point it may be
difficult and costly to change course. While data miners might have some
intuitions about the influence that prejudice or bias played in the prior decisions
that will serve as training data, data miners may not have any systematic way
of measuring and correcting for that influence. And even though ensuring
reliable samples before training a model is a possibility, the data may never be
perfect. It may be impossible to determine, ex ante, how much the bias
contributes to the disparate impact, it may not be obvious how to collect
additional data that makes the sample more representative, and it may be
prohibitively expensive to do so. Companies will rarely be able to resolve these
problems completely; their models will almost always suffer from some
deficiency that results in a disparate impact. A standard that holds companies
liable for any amount of theoretically avoidable disparate impact is likely to
ensnare all companies. Thus, even at this level of abstraction, it becomes clear
that holding the decision makers responsible for these disparate impacts is at

730

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

least partly troubling from a due process perspective. Such concerns may
counsel against using data mining altogether. This would be a perverse
outcome, given how much even imperfect data mining can do to help reduce
the very high rates of discrimination in employment decisions.
If liability for getting things wrong is difficult to imagine, how does
liability for getting things right make any more sense? That proxy
discrimination largely rediscovers preexisting inequalities suggests that perhaps
Title VII is not the appropriate remedial vehicle. If what is at stake are the
results of decades of historical discrimination and wealth concentration that
have created profound inequality in society, is that not too big a problem to
remedy through individual lawsuits, assuming affirmative action and similar
policies are off the table? Thus, perfect data mining forces the question: if
employers can say with certainty that, given the status quo,284 candidates from
protected classes are on average less ready for certain jobs than more privileged
candidates, should employers specifically be penalized for hiring fewer
candidates from protected classes?
Doctrinally, the answer is yes, to some extent. Professor Christine Jolls
has written that disparate impact doctrine is akin to accommodation in
disability lawthat is, both accommodations and disparate impact specifically
require employers to depart from pure market rationality and incur costs
associated with employing members of protected classes.285 Similarly, the Title
VII annuity cases286 and Title VIIs ban on following racist third-party
preferences287 each require a departure from market rationality. Thus, Title VII
makes that decision to a degree. But to what degree? How much cost must an
employer bear?
Title VII does not require an employer to use the least discriminatory
means of running a business.288 Likewise, Title VII does not aim to remedy
historical discrimination and current inequality by imposing all the costs of
restitution and redistribution on individual employers.289 It is more
appropriately understood as a standard of defensible disparate impact. One
route, then, to addressing the problems is to make the inquiry more searching
and put the burden on the employer to avoid at least the easy cases. In a system
that is as unpredictable as data mining can be, perhaps the proper way of

284. We cannot stress enough the import of these caveats. Certainty is a strong and unlikely
precondition, and the status quo should not be taken as a given, as we explain below.
285. See generally Jolls, supra note 90.
286. See Ariz. Governing Comm. v. Norris, 463 U.S. 1073, 1083 (1983); City of Los Angeles
Dept of Water & Power v. Manhart, 435 U.S. 702, 708 (1978).
287. See 29 C.F.R.  1604.2(a)(1)(iii) (2015) (stating the EEOCs position that the preferences
of coworkers, the employer, clients or customers cannot be used to justify disparate treatment).
288. See, e.g., El v. Se. Pa. Transp. Auth., 479 F.3d 232, 242 (3d Cir. 2007).
289. See Steven L. Willborn, The Disparate Impact Model of Discrimination: Theory and
Limits, 34 AM. U. L. REV. 799, 80910 (1985).

2016]

BIG DATAS DISPARATE IMPACT

731

thinking about the solution is a duty of care, a theory of negligent
discrimination.290
But if Title VII alone cannot solve these problems, where should society
look for answers? Well, the first answer is to question the status quo. Data
mining takes the existing state of the world as a given and ranks candidates
according to their predicted attributes in that world. Data mining, by its very
nature, treats the target variable as the only item that employers are in a
position to alter; everything else that happens to correlate with different values
for the target variable is assumed stable. But there are many reasons to question
these background conditions. Sorting and selecting individuals according to
their apparent qualities hides the fact that the predicted effect of possessing
these qualities with respect to a specific outcome is also a function of the
conditions under which these decisions are made. Recall the tenure example
from Part III.B. In approaching appropriate hiring practices as a matter of
selecting the right candidates at the outset, an employer will fail to recognize
potential changes that he could make to workplace conditions. A more familyfriendly workplace, greater on-the-job training, or a workplace culture more
welcoming to historically underrepresented groups could affect the course of
employees tenure and their long-term success in ways that undermine the
seemingly prophetic nature of data minings predictions.
These are all traditional goals for reducing discrimination within the
workplace, and they continue to matter even in the face of the eventual
widespread adoption of data mining. But data can play a role here, too. For
example, comparing the performance of equally qualified candidates across
different workplaces can help isolate the formal policies and institutional
dynamics that are more or less likely to help workers flourish. Research of this
sort could also reveal areas for potential reform.291
Education is also important. Employers may take some steps to rectify the
problem on their own if they better understand the cause of the disparity. Right
now, many of the problems described in Part I are relatively unknown. But the
more employers and data miners understand these pitfalls, the more they can
strive to create better models on their own. Many employers switch to datadriven practices for the express purpose of eradicating bias;292 if employers
discover that they are introducing new forms of bias, they can correct course.
Even employers seeking only to increase efficiency or profit may find that
their incentives align with the goals of nondiscrimination. Faulty data and data

290. See generally David Benjamin Oppenheimer, Negligent Discrimination, 141 U. PA. L.
REV. 899 (1993).
291. Solon Barocas, Putting Data to Work, DATA AND DISCRIMINATION: COLLECTED ESSAYS
58, 60 (Seeta Pea Gangadharan, Virginia Eubanks & Solon Barocas eds., 2014).
292. Claire Cain Miller, Can an Algorithm Hire Better than a Human?, N.Y. TIMES (June 25,
2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/upshot/can-an-algorithm-hire-better-than-a-human.html
[https://perma.cc/UR37-83D4].

732

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 104:671

mining will lead employers to overlook or otherwise discount people who are
actually good employees. Where the cost of addressing these problems is at
least compensated for by a business benefit of equal or greater value,
employers may have natural incentives to do so.
Finally, employers could also make more effective use of the tools that
computer scientists have begun to develop.293 Advances in these areas will
depend, crucially, on greater and more effective collaboration between
employers, computer scientists, lawyers, advocates, regulators, and policy
makers.294
This Essay is a call for caution in the use of data mining, not its
abandonment. While far from a panacea, data mining can and should be part of
a panoply of strategies for combatting discrimination in the workplace and for
promoting fair treatment and equality. Ideally, institutions can find ways to use
data mining to generate new knowledge and improve decision making that
serves the interests of both decision makers and protected classes. But where
data mining is adopted and applied without care, it poses serious risks of
reproducing many of the same troubling dynamics that have allowed
discrimination to persist in society, even in the absence of conscious prejudice.

293.
294.
2017).

See list supra note 217.
Joshua A. Kroll, et al., Accountable Algorithms, 165 U. PA. L. REV. __ (forthcoming

