See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322697502

Household Power Optimisation and Monitoring System
Article  January 2018

CITATIONS

READS

0

861

3 authors:
John Batani

Dzambo Silence

15 PUBLICATIONS 46 CITATIONS

1 PUBLICATION 0 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Israel Magodi
Chinhoyi University of Technology
2 PUBLICATIONS 0 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Automatic home floor cleaner robot View project

Computer Science Textbook Series View project

All content following this page was uploaded by John Batani on 25 January 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

Household Power Optimisation and
Monitoring System
John Batani, Silence Dzambo and Israel Magodi
ICT & Electronics Department
Chinhoyi University of Technology,
P.Bag 7724 Chinhoyi, Zimbabwe

ABSTRACT
Like most of the developing countries, Zimbabwe continues to face critical electricity
shortages. In this paper, the authors present a smart solution for reducing electricity usage
in households while improving comfort levels for the dwellers. The authors developed a
prototype to optimise electricity usage by domestic appliances. In attaining optimal power
usage in households and remote manipulation of household appliances, the researchers
utilized the design science research methodology. The proposed system reduced power
usage and cost of electricity in households by at least 50 per cent. The results benefit the
nation by reducing domestic electricity usage and thus reducing the overall electricity
shortages which may affect the manufacturing and other sectors of the economy. Remote
manipulation of, and communication with the devices by the user are achieved through the
Bluetooth technology and the Global System for Mobile communication. When the user
turns on a stove, the system automatically turns off the fridge to minimise power consumed.
However, the performance of this system may be affected by the performance of the
sensors used. The focus of this paper was to reduce the amount of electricity consumed by
households, thus reducing the overall stress on the national power grid and increasing the
available electricity for industrial use, leading to employment creation. The proposed
system can help in the realization of the UNs SDGs through ensuring there is adequate
electricity for industrial use, as espoused by SDG 9.

Keywords
Power optimization, Household power saving, Electricity saving, Electricity shortage,
SDGs, IT4D, ICT4D.

1. INTRODUCTION
The importance of electricity in any economy cannot be underestimated
[1,2], hence the need to efficiently use it. Zimbabwe currently has a shortage
of electricity and since 2007 the nation has experienced load shedding due
to inadequate generation of electricity by the national power utility company
[3]. [4]has it that there is generally shortage of electricity globally, and
Zimbabwe is no exception. According to [3] Zimbabwe will continue to
have electricity shortages for upto 8 more years due to the incapacity to
generate sufficient electricity. Several attempts, such as the use of energy
savers, electricity importation and use of alternative, natural power sources

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

23

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

such as gas and solar, have been made to ease pressure on the insufficient
electricity in Zimbabwe. However, the problem of electricity shortage in
Zimbabwe still persists, and there is a call to everyone to contribute towards
solving the problem [3]. In light of this, the researchers developed a
household power optimization and monitoring system for optimizing the
usage of the inadequate electricity that is currently generated in the country
while not inconveniencing the users.
Africas electricity shortage is hugely characterised by continuing power
cuts and a complete deficiency of electricity infrastructure [5]. This has
resulted in negative effects to human and socioeconomic development
across the continent [5]. According to [5], only an average of 40 per cent of
Africans enjoy a consistent electricity supply; while only 69 per cent of the
electrified homes really have electricity that works most or all of the time.
62 per cent of Zimbabwes population has access to an electricity grid [5].
[5] claim that only 30 per cent of Zimbabweans have electricity that works
reliably, 26 per cent have electricity that works half the time while 44 per
cent have electricity that either works ocassionally or not at all. Zimbabwe
Electricty Supply Authority (ZESA) is the sole producer, distributor and
seller of electricity. [6] states that the electricity industry in Zimbabwe has
operated as a controlled monolopoly for about five decades. [3] has it that
they will reduce electricity generation from 750MW to 475MW due to
reduced dam levels since most of the electricity in the country in hydro
generated. Zimbabwe has had an 80 per cent urban electrification, 20 per
cent rural electrification, and 41 per cent overall elecrification growth from
1980 to 2007 [7]. An unmatched increasing population and balooning
number of electric appliances has created an electricity shortage in
Zimbabwe, resulting in substantial load shedding [3]. This electricity
shortage is despite several efforts that have been made to increase electricity
supply and reduce electricity consumption in Zimbabwe, including power
importation, use of energy savers and use of alternative energy sources such
as solar and biogas [3]. All over the world, several IT based systems have
been developed in an attempt to reduce excessive power demand, such as
the Green Building in Italy [8]. In Zimbabwe, little has been done to
optimise power usage through the use of ICTs [1]. In 2012 ZESA
introduced
pre-paid meters as to enable customers to manage their
electricity bills and encourage them to use electricity wisely. Despite all
these efforts, Zimbabwe still faces electricity shortage [3], hence the need to
come up with a solution for optimisation

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

24

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

1.1 Problem Statement
There is generally a serious shortage of electricity in the whole world in
general and Zimbabwe in particular [4]. Zimbabwe has a reliable electricity
capacity of the order of 1 320 MW (Megawatts) against a demand of about 2
200 MW [9]. [10] concurs that Zimbabwe is facing critical electricity
shortages due to inadequate electricity generation. Several efforts have been
made in Zimbabwe to reduce electricity consumption and improve
electricity supply. Such efforts include the use of energy savers, electricity
importation and use of alternative, natural power sources such as gas and
solar. However, Zimbabwe continues to face electricity shortages as
evidenced by massive power cuts and load shedding [3]. This has affected
both domestic and industrial consumers; hence the need to come up with a
solution that optimises electricity usage in Zimbabwe.
1.2 Research Objectives
1. To design an automated system that optimises electricity usage in
households.
2. To design an android application that enables remote manipulation
and monitoring of plugged on household electric appliances.
1.3 Significance of the Study
This study seeks to come up with a solution for optimising electricity usage
in households; hence reducing the load on the national grid. Reducing
electricity consumed by households reduces the national demand for
electricity and may save the country foreign currency in reducing electricity
imports. Moreover, if domestic electricity consumption is reduced, it
increases the amount of electricity available for industrial use, which in turn
may improve employment creation. According to [11], every single
occupation in the manufacturing sector generates more than two million
occupations in other sectors, hence it is important to ensure that the
manufacturing sector is sufficiently powered. In addition to power usage
optimisation, the study also seeks to reduce electricity bills for household
consumers
2. RELATED WORKS
Power optimization refers to reducing the amount of power consumed by
devices (such as home appliances, while preserving their functionality)
through designing automation tools that minimise power wastage [12]. A
well designed monitoring system should be capable of maintaining preset
environmental conditions in the building [13]. Various solutions for energy
saving in households using smart technology have been proposed and
developed. Most approaches in literature for energy saving in households
focus on lowering the power consumed by heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) appliances, such as the household heating systems

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

25

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

[14], air-conditioning [15] or both of them [16]. [17] further identified
lighting and home appliances as two more areas to be incorporated in energy
management features to minimize the domestic energy waste. Other power
optimisation solutions indirectly attend to lowering the power consumed by
such (HVAC) devices by providing improved monitoring and controlling
options for the devices, which will in turn result in power consumption
being lowered [18]. The majority of such solutions employ a wide range of
sensors for measuring humidity and temperature, the data from which are
processed by fuzzy controllers [14].
[8] designed an automated power management system called the
GreenBuilding. This system used sensors to intelligently monitor power
usage and automatically control the behaviour of devices in a building. The
system provides a dashboard through which a user can view power
consumption statistics by each appliance [8]. The Arduino platform was
used in designing the network of sensors. Although GreenBuilding allows
the user to view reports based of power consumptions, it does not send
notifications/alerts to the user through the phone pertaining electric
appliance consumption or status notifications. Moreover, once
GreenBuilding is installed, it does not allow users to create their own modes
based on their own priority preferences on appliances.
The Smart Grid is another power optimisation solution which is an
amalgamation of communication and electric infrastructure through IT in
the current electrical networks to boost efficiency [19]. This system can
control daily used household devices according to user defined tariff rates
for each particular device, thus reducing electricity costs to the consumer
and reducing pressure on the grid [20].
[21] designed a simple system for remotely controlling and monitoring
lights, using the Global System for Mobile Communication for long range
communication and Bluetooth technology for short range communication.
The system sought to reduce electricity consumed by household devices
through the use of infrared sensor. Apart from reducing electricity usage, the
system also notified users of any irregular situations (like high temperatures
and intrusions) through Short Messaging System or Bluetooth technology.
Upon receiving a notification on a mobile phone the user initiates
appropriate action which will be implemented by the system [21]. The use
of Bluetooth for communication reduces costs since communication via
Bluetooth is not charged. However, the system is inefficient in
circumstances that require high real-time data transfer. It also does not
operate in various modes once it is started off, leaving the user with little
room to make some options on the usage level of the system. Moreover, the

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

26

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

system does not prioritise electricity usage on different household
appliances based on the available power.
[22] developed a Smart Power Saving System in smart homes for
controlling appliances with the aim of saving power. The system comprises
two modules namely fingerprint electronic door-locking and electricity
saving. It uses GSM for interaction between the microcontroller and the
phone. A user scans their fingerprint on the door-lock and if it matches, the
electricity saving module will be turned on. The electricity saving sub-unit
controls household electric devices in the home in response to the relative
conditions from different sensors installed in the room. Fan and lights are
switched on/off in response to the temperature and light intensity inside the
home [22]. However, the module had a narrow scope in terms of monitoring
and controlling electricity usage. This is evidenced by the systems target on
small household appliances specifically fan and lights whilst larger
appliances with higher consumption were excluded such as stoves and
fridges. The biometric module in the system added unnecessary costs as far
as the power saving was concerned. The biometric module was more into
security than power saving.
Artificial Intelligent-based systems have also been proposed for power
usage optimization. These learn about the behavior of an inhabitant in a
smart house to self-adjust the system so that it can be independent and easy
to personalize [23]. Of late, several of such Artificial Intelligent methods for
recognizing user activities using supervised learning in a smart home have
been published [24]. The main disadvantage of such systems though is that
they need prior labeled data for training the algorithms. Manually
representing human behavior data in line with event sensor readings takes a
lot of time and is monotonous and makes the system less scalable [25].
Furthermore, it is highly impractical in reality that all further inhabitant
activities will be similar with training data, thus making such systems more
suitable only for the homes for which they were designed [26]. [6]
implemented a home automation system using Arduino and Android, but
their focus was more on smart homes and the comfort associated with them
rather than power saving.
3. METHODOLOGY
The design science research methodology (Improvement Research) was
adopted for this research. The approach focuses on creation, invention or
design of some new artifacts, while deriving or obtaining suggestions to
solving the problem from current knowledge or theory base for the problem
domain [27]. Figure 1 shows the architecture of the proposed system.

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

27

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

Sensors

Figure 1. System Architecture

Current sensors are connected to AC power source to which home
appliances are connected. The current sensors communicate with Arduino
which in turn is interfaced with the GSM module. A user can interact with
the system through an Android application. For example, if an appliance is
turned on, say a fan, a current sensor will send information to the Arduino
which will communicate with the GSM module, and a user will be notified
either via SMS or Bluetooth in the form of a system status. A user can also
turn on or off appliances remotely via an Android application through the
GSM module, Arduino and a relay action will be sent to the AC power
source. This means a user can turn on or off any appliance in the home from
anywhere. When power is restored after a power cut, the user will be
automatically notified and shown all appliances that will be on at that time
so that the user can decide which ones to turn off, thus eliminating
unnecessary power wastages. Temperature, motion and light sensors will
provide values to the Arduino, and depending on the rules set and values
read it will send appropriate relay actions to the power source. The system
also generates graphical electricity consumption reports, showing which
appliances consumed how much electricity per given period.

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

28

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG
START

Initialise sensors,
GSM and LCD
Delay for 10
seconds
Read motion sensor
status

Motion
detected?

NO

Turn OFF lights and
fan if ON

NO
NO

Read temperature
sensor value

Read light
intensity sensor
value

Temperature
sensor value<set
point?

Light sensor
value> set
value?

YES

Turn off fan via relay
Notify user (SMS)

YES

Turn off light via relay
Notify user (SMS)

Delay for
5 minutes

Figure 2. System Flow Chart

The motion sensor is used to check whether there is anyone in the house. If
there is no one yet lights and/ or fan is on, the system will automatically turn
them off. The assumption is someone might have forgotten to switch them
off before leaving the room. The system will check again whether there is
anyone in the room after ten seconds. This ten seconds delay can be set to
another value as determined by the user in line with their requirements. If
motion is detected, the system checks whether there is enough light intensity
and heat as determined by the user. If light intensity is too low, lights will
automatically be turned on. Conversely, if light intensity is too high, lights
will be automatically turned off. The fan will also be turned on if

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

29

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

temperature is higher than a user set value and will be turned off if
temperature rises to a maximum desirable value. When 5 minutes have
elapsed, the system will check again whether there is anyone in the room by
reading a motion sensor status. This iterates as long as the system is up and
running.
The Algorithm
START
Let:
MaxTemp be the maximum room temperature before fan automatically
turns on
MinTemp be the minimum room temperature before fan automatically t
urns off
MaxLight be the maximum room light intensity before lights
automatically turn off
MinLight be the minimum light intensity before lights automatically
turn on
Note: User sets custom values to MaxTemp, MinTemp, MaxLight and
MinLight according to their preferences.
Steps:
I.
II.

Initialise sensors, GSM and LCD
Read motion sensor status
a. If motion is detected
i. Read temperature sensor value
1. If temperature sensor value < MinTemp Then
a. Turn off fan and notify user on mobile
phone
b. Delay for 5 minutes and goto to step I
2. Else if temperature sensor value> MaxTemp
Then
a. Turn on fan and notify user
3. Else delay for 6 seconds and goto step II.a.i.
4. End if
ii. Read light intensity sensor value
1. If light intensity > MaxLight Then
a. Turn off lights
2. Else if light intensity < MinLight Then
a. Turn on lights and notify user

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

30

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

3. Else delay for 6 seconds and goto step I.a.ii.
b. Else
i. Delay for 5 minutes
ii. Goto step II
End If
III.

IV.

If stove is turned ON Then
a. If fridge is ON Then
i. Automatically turn OFF fridge and notify user
ii. End If
b. End If
If user turns stove OFF Then
a. If fridge is OFF Then
i. Automatically turn ON the fridge and notify user
ii. End If
b. End If

The system was implemented using the Java Programming language, which
was used to link the user interface and the SQLite database. In addition to
Java code, XML was used to create the interfaces for the android
application. Eclipse Indigo IDE was used to implement the application. The
Android SDK and ADT were also used. The researchers created, compiled,
debugged and deployed the android application from the Eclipse IDE using
the android ADT. The Android SDK was integrated into the Eclipse IDE to
help create and test the system during different iterations of the application.
SQLite was used for the database.
The following hardware components are required in the development of the
prototype and testing of the prototype: Arduino UNO (R3), GSM Module
with an unlocked SIM card, 4 Channel 5 volt Relay, Connecting wires,
Bread board, 16x2 LCD, Power supply, An Android mobile phone for
hosting the user application, Sensors (PIR motion sensor, ACS712 current
sensor, LM35 temperature sensor and LDR light intensity sensor), and
Resistors. Android Studio, Arduino Development Tool, Eclipse IDE and
Proteus must also be installed on the development computer.

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

31

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

4. RESULTS
The system was evaluated in terms of its ability to optimise power usage by
domestic appliances. While a prototype was developed and tested using a
fan, light bulb, stove and water heater as the household appliances, its
effectiveness in terms of power consumption optimisation was measured for
the light bulb only. The researchers calculated light bulb power
consumption over 24 hours for best and worst cases. The researchers then
ran a 24 hours long experiment using the same light bulb on a prototype of
the proposed system. The results of these experiments are shown in Table 1.
The results indicate a significant drop in power usage when using the
system being proposed herein. Monthly figures are derived from the average
daily figures obtained from the experiments. The light bulb used was a
230V, 100W bulb which consumes 0.1 kW per hour.
Table 1. Power Consumption Comparison for a light bulb before and after installation
of the system

Appliance:
light bulb

Before Installation

After
Installation

Worst
Case

Best
Case

Optimal Case

Average
hourly 0.1
consumption (kW)

0.1

0.1

Maximum
consumption
(Hours)

total 24
time

18

12

Maximum
total 2.4
consumption (kW)

1.8

1.2

The worst case scenario is when an appliance remains on for the whole day
and night. Given that the bulb used consumed 0.1kW per hour, if left on for
24 hours it will consume 2.4kW. This worst case scenario is only possible if
no power optimisation system is implemented. In this experiment, the
researchers defined the best case as the case when consumption time is at
least 12 hours but less than 24 hours per day. Taking the lower bound of 12
and upper bound of 24 hours per day and calculating the average of the two,
it gives 18 hours as the best case scenarios hours when the light will be on
per day. The assumption is that the user will be turning the lights on and off
when necessary. For 18 hours at a consumption of 0.1 kW per hour, the light
bulb will consume 1.8kW per day. The optimal case is was when the power

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

32

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

optimisation system was used. Under this case, lights were only on for 12
hours per day, when it was dark, and hence consumed 1.2kW.
Table 2. Comparisons of Power Consumption Costs

Appliance:
light bulb

Before Installation

After
Installation

Worst
Case

Best
Case

Optimal Case

Average
hourly 0.1
consumption (kW)

0.1

0.1

Maximum
consumption
(Hours)

total 24
time

18

12

Maximum
total 2.4
consumption (kW)

1.8

1.2

Cost per kW per hour 0.09
(US$)

0.09

0.09

Estimated total cost per 0.216
day (US $)

0.162

0.108

Estimated total cost per 6.48
month (US $)

4.86

3.24

The researchers used Equation 1 for calculating electricity cost savings as a
percentage:

 =

  100


... . Equation 1

Where
ECSP = Electricity Cost Savings as a percentage,
ECBI = Electricity Cost Before Installation of the system,
ECAI = Electricity Cost After Installation of the system
Cost savings were calculated for both the worst and best case scenarios
using Equation 1. For the worst case scenario:
 =

    100


ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

33

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG
$(6.48  3.24)  100
=
$6.48
  = %

For the best case scenario:
    100

$ 4.86  3.24  100
=
$4.86
  =    %

 =

Cost of electricity is directly proportional to usage, hence reducing
electricity consumption results in reduced cost of electricity to domestic
electricity consumers. In terms of percentages, reduction in cost is equal to
reduction in the amount of power consumed. The results indicate that
implementing the household power optimisation and monitoring system
resulted in cost saving of 33.3 per cent and 50 per cent for the best and
worst case scenarios respectively. Consequently, it means the amount of
power consumed was reduced by the same margins. The system resulted in
optimal power usage and thus reduced demand for electricity. Apart from
power usage optimisation, the system improves comfort levels for users as
they remotely monitor and control their household devices. The ability of
users to monitor and control household electric devices from a distance is
also useful for people living with disabilities as they can control and
monitor appliances in the home without having to physically move around
to power switches which are usually mounted on different points on the
walls of houses.
A number of authors who have been engaged in making smart homes
systems concentrated more on improving the comfort for inhabitants than
electricity saving. [28], [29] and [30] have focused more on automation with
little inclination towards power saving, hence they did not state how much
could be saved by implementing their systems. While some of the systems
resulted in electricity savings the researchers did not quantify the electricity
savings; thus providing no comparison basis. [14] claim that their system
reduced electricity consumption by domestic heating but did not state by
how much.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The Household Power Optimisation and Monitoring System proposed
herein focused mainly on reducing the amount of electricity consumed by
households and hence reducing stress on the national power grid. The
results of the system indicate that the system can reduce power consumption
in households by up to 50 per cent. This 50 per cent reduction in electricity

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

34

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG

consumed translates to 50 per cent savings in electricity costs to households.
It is important to save electricity since electrical power is scarce in
developing countries like Zimbabwe [11]. Saving electricity in households
increases the amount of electricity available for industrial use, which in turn
increases employment creation. [11] claims that every single occupation in
the manufacturing sector generates more than two million occupations in
other sectors of the economy, hence it is imperative to make sure that there
is enough electricity for the manufacturing industry. The system also has
other benefits of convenience and comfort since users can remotely
manipulate appliances on their phones. This feature makes this system an
inclusive solution as it also helps people living with disabilities to
manipulate appliances on their own without having to move around to
different power switch points around the home to power on or off
appliances. However, the system could be improved by incorporating voice
commands to control appliances. It could also be improved by adding a
functionality of predicting future consumption of an appliance based on past
and present consumption patterns. The system is designed on the
assumptions that supply of electricity is always less than demand; the users
are not using the available electricity optimally and all policies pertaining
electrical usage are held constant. The performance of this system depends
on the performance of the sensors. Moreover, remote manipulation of
electric gadgets will depend on the availability of network, hence remote
manipulation and monitoring may not work if there is no network coverage,
unless the user is within the Bluetooth range. The focus of the study is to
optimise power usage in households only.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Nyasha Kaseke, "Journal of Business Management & Social Sciences Research,"
Emergence Of Electricity Crisis In Zimbabwe, Reform Response And Cost
Implications, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 1-16, October 2013.
[2] Tichaona Chifamba. (2011) Commercial Farmers Union of Zimbabwe Web site.
[Online].
http://www.cfuzim.org/index.php/newspaper-articles-2/zesa/2516continuing-power-shortages-cripple-zimbabwe-economy
(2013,
January)
ZESA
Holdings
Web
site.
[Online].
[3] ZESA.
http://www.zesa.co.zw/index.php/component/k2/item/17-why-do-we-have-loadshedding?
[4] Tom Chuma. (2012, Oct.) A case study of zimbabwe. [Online].
https://leadpanafricansession.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/zimbabwe-casestudy1.doc
[5] Abel Oyuke, Halley Peter Penar, and Brian Howard, "Off-grid or 'off-on':Lack of
access, unreliable electricity supply still plague majority of Africans," Afrobarometer
Dispatch, vol. 6, no. 75, pp. 1-26, March 2016.

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

35

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG
[6] S.E. Mangwengwende, "Increasing Electricity Access While Ensuring Financial
Viabilityy: A Perspective form the African Electricity Industry," in Global Network
on Energy For Suatinable Development (GNESD), Nairobi, 2005.
[7] Central Statistics Office, "Power Statistics in Zimbabwe," Power Statistics in
Zimbabwe, 2008.
[8] Giuseppe Anastasi, Francesco Corucci, and Francesco Marcelloni, "An Intelligent
System for Electrical Energy Management in Buildings," in 11th International
Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, 2012.
Shirichena.
(2014)
http://www.technomag.co.zw.
[Online].
[9] Allan
http://www.technomag.co.zw/2014/11/04/zimbabwes-energy-crisis-demand-supplyimbalance/#stash.
Mhlanga.
(2014)
Financial
Gazzette.
[10] Phillimon
http://www.financialgazette.co.zw/zim-faces-unprecedented-power-crisis/

[Online].

[11] The United Nations. (2016, August) The United Nations Web site. [Online].
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/9_Why-itMatters_Goal-9_Industry_1p.pdf
[12] Jan M Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolic, Digital Integrated
Circuits, 2nd ed., 2002.
[13] University of Kentucky. (2014) KENTUCKY POULTRY ENERGY EFFICIENCY
PROJECT.
[Online].
http://www2.ca.uky.edu/poultryprofitability/Production_manual/Chapter11_Monitori
ng_and_control_systems/Chapter11_overview_of_systems.html
[14] J. Villar, E. de la Cal, and J Sedano, "A fuzzy logic based efficient energy saving
approach for domestic heating systems.," Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering,
vol. 15, pp. 1-9, 2009.
[15] Y. He, "Energy saving of central air-conditioning and control system:," Energy
saving of central air-conditioning and control system: Case study: Nanchang
Hongkelong Supermarket., vol. 1, p. 12, 2010.
[16] M. Nowak and A. Urbaniak, "Utilization of intelligent control algorithms for thermal
comfort optimization and energy saving.," in 2011 12th IEEE Control Conference,
2011.
[17] E. Inji, I. Attia, and P Hamdy, "Energy Saving Through Smart Home.," Energy
Saving Through Smart Home., vol. 2, pp. 22-34, 2011.
[18] M. Jahn, "The Energy Aware Smart Home.," The Energy Aware Smart Home., pp. 19, 2010.
[19] Borlase, Smart Grids: Infrastructure, Technology and Solutions, CRC Press, Ed.:
Taylor and Francis Group, 2012.
[20] S.P.S. Gill, "Smart Power Monitoring System Using," Sixth International Conference
on Sensing Technology, p. 1, 2012.
[21] Vini Madan, "GSM-Bluetooth based Remote Monitoring and Control System with
Automatic Light Controller," International Journal of Computer Applications, p. 1,
2012.

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

36

International Journal of Computer Science and Business Informatics

IJCSBI.ORG
[22] M, S Madhu, M Gangadhar, and G, C Sanjaya, "ARM Based Smart Power Saving
System for Home Automation," International Journal of Computer Science and
Information Technologies, Vol. 5 (3), pp. 2910-2913, 2014.
[23] Bengio Roux, "Deep belief networks are compact," Neural Computation, vol. 22, no.
8, p. 192, 2010.
[24] F., Rokach, L., Shapira, B., Ricci, Recommender Systems Handbook. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 2011.
[25] Hyong-Euk Lee and Young-Min Kim, From Smart Home to Smart Care, G Giroux &
H Pigot (Eds), Ed.: IOS Press, 2005.
[26] D. Cook, "A method for mining and monitoring human activity patterns in homebased health monitoring systems.," ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems, vol. 4,
p. 9, 2013.
[27] C.S Peirce, Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, C and Weiss , P. Eds
Harshorne, Ed. Cambrigdge: Havard University Press, 1985.
[28] Poonam B. Patil, Rupali.R Patil, Swati V. Patil, and Avadhoot R. Telepatil, "Home
Automation System Using Android and Arduino Board," International Journal of
Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 50765082, April 2016.
[29] M.L Sharma, Kumar Sachin, and Mehta Nipuri, "SMART HOME SYSTEM USING
IOT," International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 4, no. 11,
pp. 1108-1112, November 2017.
[30] P Sushma and M.J Roopa, "Wi-Fi Based Home Automation System Using Androis &
Arduino Platform," International Journal for Research in Applied Science and
Engineering, vol. 5, no. VI, pp. 942-945, June 2017.

This paper may be cited as:
Batani, J., Dzambo, S. and Magodi, I., 2017. Household Power Optimisation
and Monitoring System. International Journal of Computer Science and
Business Informatics, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 23-37.

ISSN: 1694-2108 | Vol. 17, No. 2. JULY-DECEMBER 2017

View publication stats

37

