ACCEPTED FROM OPEN CALL

Intelligent 5G: When Cellular Networks
Meet Artificial Intelligence
Rongpeng Li, Zhifeng Zhao, Xuan Zhou, Guoru Ding, Yan Chen, Zhongyao Wang, and Honggang Zhang

Abstract
5G cellular networks are assumed to be the
key enabler and infrastructure provider in the
ICT industry, by offering a variety of services
with diverse requirements. The standardization of 5G cellular networks is being expedited, which also implies more of the candidate
technologies will be adopted. Therefore, it is
worthwhile to provide insight into the candidate techniques as a whole and examine the
design philosophy behind them. In this article,
we try to highlight one of the most fundamental
features among the revolutionary techniques
in the 5G era, i.e., there emerges initial intelligence in nearly every important aspect of
cellular networks, including radio resource management, mobility management, service provisioning management, and so on. However,
faced with ever-increasingly complicated configuration issues and blossoming new service
requirements, it is still insufficient for 5G cellular
networks if it lacks complete AI functionalities.
Hence, we further introduce fundamental concepts in AI and discuss the relationship between
AI and the candidate techniques in 5G cellular
networks. Specifically, we highlight the opportunities and challenges to exploit AI to achieve
intelligent 5G networks, and demonstrate the
effectiveness of AI to manage and orchestrate
cellular network resources. We envision that
AI-empowered 5G cellular networks will make
the acclaimed ICT enabler a reality.

Introduction

Currently, fourth-generation (4G) cellular networks are being globally deployed to provide
all-IP (Internet Protocol) broadband connectivity. Recalling that second-generation (2G) global
networks for mobile communications (GSM),
debuted in 1991, just started to provide digital
voice telephony, and third-generation (3G) cellular networks, launched in 2001, initially provided mobile Internet solutions. It took less than
30 years to successfully transform cellular networks from pure telephony systems to networks
that can transport rich multimedia content [1]
and have a profound impact on our daily life.
Nowadays, the landscape of the information
communication technology (ICT) industry is rapidly changing. First, mobile broadband access is
expected to have a drastic increase with 1000

times more aggregate throughput [2] and 10
times more at the link level [3] from 2010 to
2020. Second, an increasing number of objects
are being digitalized to form the Internet of
Things, posing more stringent requirements on
latency, battery lifetime, etc. [4]. Therefore, to
enhance service provisioning and satisfy the
coming diversified requirements, it is necessary
to revolutionize the cellular networks with cutting-edge technologies. The standardization of
next-generation (5G) cellular networks is being
expedited, which also implies more of the
candidate technologies will be adopted. This
naturally raises questions such as which new
technologies might 5G cellular networks possess, and which features will these technologies
have in common?
From the very beginning, 5G cellular networks were assumed to be the key enabler and
infrastructure provider in the ICT industry, by
offering three types of services from enhanced
mobile broadband (eMBB) with bandwidth-consuming and throughput-driving requirements
to new services such as ultra-reliable low latency service (URLLC) and massive machine-type
communications (mMTC). In that regard, though
technologies such as densified cells and massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
are essential to boost capacity in the 5G era,
it is cost-ineffective to deploy such techniques.
Instead, 5G cellular networks mainly revolutionize themselves by initially embracing the intelligence to agilely boost both spectrum efficiency
(SE) and energy efficiency (EE). Specifically, 5G
cellular networks provide alternative options for
radio resource management (RRM), mobility
management (MM), management and orchestration (MANO), and service provisioning management (SPM) mechanisms. Hence, it is no longer
necessary to build dedicated networks for individual services (e.g., the GSM-Railway communication networks). On the contrary, as depicted
in Fig. 1, due to the development of smarter 5G
networks, it will be feasible to provide customized end-to-end network slices (NS) [5] to simultaneously satisfy distinct service requirements,
such as ultra-low latency in URLLC and ultra-high
throughput in eMBB.
There is no doubt that 5G cellular networks
will tailor the provisioning mechanisms for different predefined services and pave the way for the
application of complete intelligence. However,

Rongpeng Li, Zhifeng Zhao (corresponding author), and Honggang Zhang are with Zhejiang University; Xuan Zhou and Yan Chen are with
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.; Guoru Ding is with PLA University of Science and Technology; Zhongyao Wang is with the Alibaba Group.

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

1536-1284/17/$25.00  2017 IEEE

Digital Object Identifier:
10.1109/MWC.2017.1600304WC

175

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4G: all-IP
broadband
connectivity
via phone

4G cellular networks

mMTC,
200,000/km 2

Communication,
mobile Internet,
...

5G cellular networks

Automobile,
factory,
...

Metering,
agriculture,
climate,
...

FIGURE 1. 5G cellular networks: a key enabler to all mobile devices across all

industries.

it is still challenging and time-consuming for 5G
cellular network operators to solve ever-increasingly complicated configuration issues and satisfy
evolving service requirements, since 5G cellular
networks merely possess more technical options
to deal with predefined intelligent problems, rather than gain the ability to interact with the environment (e.g., traffic load, service characteristics).
Fortunately, such an interaction falls into the field
of artificial intelligence (AI), which is dedicated
to empowering machines and systems with intelligence similar to that of humans. Hence, it is
promising to apply AI to 5G cellular networks to
deal with newly emerging issues.
In this article, we will try to answer what key
technical progress is in 5G cellular networks, why
it is crucial to embrace AI in the 5G era, and how
AI can contribute to management and orchestration in the 5G era.

The Intelligence in
5G Cellular Networks

AI is the science and engineering of making
machines as intelligent as humans, and has long
been applied to optimize communication networks in diverse configurations [6]. According
to the extent of intelligence, AI could be divided
into two levels. The first and basic level of AI is
that one machine or entity can provide multiple
pre-defined options and respond to the environment in a different yet deterministic manner. For
example, as discussed later, 5G will allow granted
and grant-free transmission for eMBB and mMTC
services, respectively. In other words, the network
will intelligently adjust the configuration after
detecting different pre-defined service indicators.
The second and complete level of AI is that one
machine or entity possesses full capability to interact (e.g., sense, mine, predict, and reason) with
the environment. More importantly, the machine
or entity is able to learn how to make appropriate responses, even when it faces strange scenarios or tasks. In this section, we will highlight
how the candidate technologies grant preliminary
intelligence (i.e., the basic level of AI) to cellular

176

networks, and transform cellular networks from
being network-centric to being user-centric and
information-centric with significant SE and EE
improvement.

Radio Resource Management

eMBB
~20 Gb/s

URLLC,
1 ms

Voice,
text,
mobile Internet

Current 4G cellular networks heavily rely on
orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM) as the signal bearer and the base of
associated access schemes. Since OFDM can be
used in both frequency-division duplex (FDD)
and time-division duplex (TDD) formats, FDD
and TDD 4G cellular networks share a similar
frame structure by grouping a static number of
subcarriers and symbols into one resource block
(RB). Benefiting from the satisfactory subcarrier
orthogonality in OFDM, information transmitted
in different RBs can be separately decoded at
the receivers with limited computational cost.
However, it is stubborn to use OFDM to simultaneously satisfy service requirements from different users with various channel conditions, user
terminal (UE) capabilities (multiple access support, full duplex mode, feature or smart phones),
mobility, frequency bands, and so on. Given
that, 5G cellular networks aim to introduce new
waveforms and provide softer air interfaces.
Specifically, filter-bank multi-carrier (FBMC) and
unified-filter multi-carrier (UFMC) are famous
candidates for more flexible frame structures and
waveforms in the 5G era. As their names imply,
FBMC and UFMC both add filters to combat outof-band leakage across subcarriers and make it
unnecessary to strictly synchronize across RBs.
Therefore, 5G cellular networks can provide
different air interface solutions in different RBs,
in which different multiple access schemes, TTI
(transmission time interval) parameters, waveforms, and duplex mode, pilot signals, etc., can
be well defined [7]. For example, as seen in Fig.
2a, larger bandwidth and symbol length can be
applied to eMBB to yield a higher rate, while
smaller TTI can be configured for URLLC to
shorten response latency.
Similar to the evolution from OFDM to FBMC/
UFMC, 5G cellular networks potentially adopt
non-orthogonal multiple access (NoMA) schemes
such as sparse coding multiple access (SCMA).
Such NoMA schemes overlap information from
two transmitters in the same radio resource and
apply successive interference cancellation (SIC)
receivers (or even more computationally-exhaustive maximum-likelihood receivers) to decode the
received information. Apparently, NoMA could
potentially lead to higher throughput. Moreover,
another advantage of NoMA is that it makes possible grant-free transmission in the uplink (UL), if
the UE identity and the preamble for grant-free
UL transmission are mapped together. Instead of
waiting for resource allocation commands as in
4G cellular networks, it is feasible to decode the
overlapped information from two UEs at the same
resources by using SIC receivers. From Fig. 2b, in
spite of the reliability advantage for granted transmission, grant-free transmission in UL could avoid
the cumbersome signaling procedures and save
latency for small packets at a trivial performance
loss. Comparatively, 5G cellular networks eventually have one alternative option, which is quite
suitable for mMTC service.

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Flexible
subcarrier
bandwidth
Frequency

mMTC

Random access (RA) preamble
RA response

Flexible
symbol
length

Message 3
Contention resolution
resource allocation
Packets

Time
eMBB

BS

eMBB

URLLC mMTC

Granted

(a)

Packets with preambles

(b)

Grant-free
Internet

Location
update
message

MME

Mobile edge
networks

Data
packet

X

Location
update
message

Core
networks

Data
packet

Location
update
message

(c)

(d)

FIGURE 2. Candidate technologies for intelligent cellular networks: a) flexible bandwidth and symbol length enabled by FBMC and

UFMC; b) granted and grant-free transmission enabled by NoMA; c) flexible mobility management schemes; d) dynamic service
provisioning stack.

Mobility Management

In 4G cellular networks, there exist two states
to manage UEs location awareness to the core
network (e.g., evolved packet system (EPS)). All
EPS mobility management (EMM)-connected UEs
should periodically report their locations, so as to
guarantee the session continuum and information reachability. Definitively, it is resource-consuming to treat all UEs the same. Instead, some
UEs at static positions (e.g., UEs for mMTC metering services) should only need to report at the
very beginning of network attachment. Taking
account of practical considerations, 5G cellular
networks introduce multiple-tier mobility management states to make the mobility management
mechanism more flexible. For example, for mMTC
UEs possessing characteristics such as immobility, cost-sensitivity, and stringent requirements
on energy-efficiency, 5G cellular networks will
wait for the communication request from UEs
and reactively start the data transmission (Fig.
2c). Meanwhile, 5G cellular networks also tailor
mobility management for some vertical industries,
based on regional characteristics. In other words,
once UEs enter a specific region, they could be
granted higher-level support (e.g., dual connectivity) for mobility management and thus update
their locations in a more proactive manner.

Management and Orchestration

Recently, the industry has witnessed the increasing maturity of software-defined networks (SDN)
[8]. In particular, some well known operators such
as AT&T, China Mobile, Telefonica, and vendors
such as Cisco and Huawei, have co-established
the Open Networking Lab (http://onlab.us/) to
bring openness and innovation in SDN to the

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

Internet, and initiated the project called Central
Office Re-architected as a Datacenter (CORD).
CORD has successfully completed the virtualization of existing hardware devices such as CPE
(customer premises equipment), OLT (optical line
transmission) and BNG (broadband network gateway), and produced software counterparts (e.g.,
applications running on open network operating
system (ONOS)) on top of commodity hardware.
Moreover, CORD has provided a framework on
which these software elements (plus any other
cloud services an operator may want to run) can
be plugged into, leading to a coherent end-to-end
system. Therefore, operators of 5G cellular networks might borrow the concept of CORD and
deploy selected functionalities according to their
own demands. Meanwhile, in order to orchestrate
services from different vendors, 5G network operators can leverage a more centralized SDN controller and adopt various means such as exposing
the same infrastructure-level interfaces or using
common cloud operating systems (e.g., ONOS) to
shield differences between multi-vendor hardware
servers in a distributed deployment manner [5].

Service Provisioning Management

In addition to softer air interface enabled by
FBMC or UFMC, it is also expected in 5G to
intelligently program the forwarding route of one
service by leveraging the application interfaces
(APIs) in SDN and have a more flexible service
provisioning stack. With the evolution of SDN
and network function virtualization (NFV), 5G cellular networks have advocated a revolutionary
concept called network slicing (NS) [9]. Instead
of building dedicated networks for different services, NS allows operators to intelligently create

177

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Cellular networks have
alternative options in
the 5G era for access
and service provisioning mechanisms
and thus gain the
foundation to apply
preliminary intelligence.
However, 5G cellular
networks are still lagging behind what is
actually required
in practice.

customized network pipes to provide optimized
solutions for different services that require diverse
functionalities, performance metrics, and isolation
criteria. Moreover, session management in 5G
will be able to adapt to UE attributes and service
requirements, by adjusting configurations such as
session categories, anchoring points, and service
continuum capabilities. Specifically, mobile edge
has potentially evolved to replace its forwarding-only functionality to an area equipped with
storage, memories, and computational power
capabilities [3]. Therefore, according to practical
requirements, UEs could select anchoring and forwarding points between the anchoring point (e.g.,
serving gateway) in core networks (CNs) and the
mobile edge networks. For example, in Fig. 2(d),
services with stringent requirements on mobility
and service continuum could shift their anchoring
points to the edge networks with closer proximity.
Moreover, in 4G, device-to-device (D2D) communication merely supports proximity services and
public safety communications. But network-assisted direct communication between vehicles and
UEs comes to a reality, and the vehicle-to-vehicle
infrastructure (V2X) services are becoming a hot
topic to better accommodate the URLLC services
of vertical industries (e.g., automobiles).
Thanks to the huge advance in signal processing capabilities evolved as Moores Law, 5G cellular networks can take advantage of advanced yet
computation-consuming technologies in almost
every aspect spanning from the physical layer to
the network architecture. Therefore, 5G cellular
networks are able to provide alternative options
for different scenarios, exhibit some preliminary
intelligence, and satisfy the minimal requirements
to adopt complete AI.

Artificial Intelligence for
Cellular Networks

Cellular networks have alternative options in the
5G era for access and service provisioning mechanisms and thus gain the foundation to apply
preliminary intelligence. However, 5G cellular
networks are still lagging behind what is actually required in practice. First, the number of configurable parameters in a typical 4G node has
increased to 1500 from 500 in a 2G node and
1000 in a 3G node [4]. If this trend continues, a
typical 5G node is expected to have 2000 or more
parameters. Therefore, it is critical to enhance
intelligence in the 5G era to realize the self-organizing features (e.g., self-configuration, self-optimization, and self-healing). Second, the service
types (e.g., eMBB, URLLC, mMTC) defined in the
5G era are static. However, new types of services
continually evolve, and the pattern in existing services frequently changes as well. In this case, 5G
cellular networks still lack functionalities to automatically recognize a new type of service, infer the
appropriate provisioning mechanism, and establish
the required network slice. Third, 5G cellular networks heavily depend on a centralized network
architecture in SDN, and still lack the agility and
robustness under the scenario of ever-increasing
heterogeneous and complicated cellular networks.
To self-organize parameters that become significantly larger, auto-build the network slices for
emerging services, and gain sufficient flexibility

178

for network maintenance, it is essential for cellular
networks to observe environment variations, learn
uncertainties, plan response actions, and configure
the networks properly. Coincidentally, AI mainly solves how to learn the variations, classify the
issues, forecast future challenges, and find potential solutions, by interacting with the environment.
Therefore, cellular networks could leverage the
concept of cognitive radio [10] and interact with
the environment using AI, so as to fully accelerate
the evolution and enter into a brand-new intelligent 5G era.
AI has evolved to multi-disciplinary techniques
such as machine learning, optimization theory,
game theory, control theory, and meta-heuristics
[11]. Among them, machine learning belongs to
one of the most important subfields in AI. Usually,
depending on the nature of the learning objects
and signals to a learning system, machine learning
is typically classified into three broad categories:
Supervised Learning: A supervised learning
agent will be fed with example inputs and their
desired outputs, and aims to determine a general
rule that nicely maps inputs to outputs. Supervised learning has been widely applied to solve
channel estimation issues in cellular networks. For
example, assume that there exists a wireless channel h, the receiver tries to exploit the transmit preamble s and the received signal y = hs + n0 (with
n0 denoting the noise) to estimate h. For such a
supervised learning problem, it is common to use
probabilistic models to characterize the transition
probability P(y|s) from s to y and take advantage of the well known Bayes learning methods
to obtain the results. The well known Kalman filtering and particle filter methods also play a very
important role in optimizing cellular networks.
Unsupervised Learning: Compared to the
aforementioned supervised learning, the input
information for unsupervised learning does not
possess priori labels. Therefore, the unsupervised
learning agent has to depend on its own capability to find the embedded structure or pattern
in its input. Usually, unsupervised learning aims
to discover hidden patterns and find the suitable
representation in the input data. In the field of AI,
unsupervised learning is applied to estimate the
hidden layer parameters in neural networks and
plays an important role in deep learning methods. Meanwhile, unsupervised learning may be
the most widely applied AI category in cellular
networks. For example, principal component
analysis (PCA) and singular value decomposition
(SVD) methods have been used to manipulate the
receiving matrix of massive MIMO to reduce the
computational complexity. Moreover, 5G NoMA
receivers also adopt some factor graph-based
methods such as expectation-maximization and
message-passing algorithms to achieve lower bit
error rate. On the other hand, some classifiers
such as the K-means Algorithm are also useful to
detect network anomalies.
Reinforcement Learning: Inspired by both control theory and behaviorist psychology, the reinforcement learning agent could obtain its goal by
interacting with a dynamic environment. However, the agent does not have explicit knowledge
of whether it has come close to its goal. Instead,
the agent should take actions in an environment
so as to maximize the cumulative reward in a

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Modules

Examples

Algorithms

Comments

Sensing

Detection of network
anomalies or events by
multiple-entry data from
hybrid sources

Logistic Regression (LR)
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
Hidden Markov Model (HMM)

Hypothesis test plays an important role in this aspect. But different
algorithms have specific scenarios. Compared to SVM, LR is more suitable for sensing scenarios with a heavy number of property combinations and stringent accuracy requirements. On the other hand, HMM is
also applicable for sensing if we try to compute the states probability
and regard a comparably larger probability as the occurrence of
anomalies or events.

Mining

Classifying services according
to the required provisioning
mechanisms (e.g., bandwidth, error rate, latency)

Supervised learning:
 Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT)
Unsupervised learning:
 Spectral Clustering
 One-class SVM
 Replicator Neural Networks (RNN)

Supervised learning heavily relies on the labeling quality of data
samples, while unsupervised learning depends on the accuracy or
suitability of parameter (e.g., threshold) settings.

Prediction

Forecasting the trend of UE
mobility or the traffic volume
of different services

Kalman Filtering (KL)
Auto-Regressive Moving Average (ARMA)
Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA)
Deep Learning (DL):
 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
 Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM)
Compress Sensing (CS)

KL/ARMA/ARIMA could well follow the variations of a one-time sequence, but fail to capture the characteristics behind this sequence. On
the other hand, DL algorithms like RNN and LSTM have the capability
to find the embedded characteristics and leverage the long-time
dependency in the sequence. Meanwhile, CS is a dedicated tool to
investigate the universal sparsity in mobile traffic series and resources
(e.g., BSs).

Reasoning

Configuration of a series of
parameters to better adapt
services.

Dynamic Programming (DP)
 Branch-and-Bound Method
 Primal-and-Dual Method
Reinforcement Learning (RL)
 Actor-critic Method
 Q-Learning Method
Transfer Learning (TL)

DP, which might belong to a generalized sense of AI, is generally
exploited to solve the Bellman equation, based on complete knowledge of the considered environment. In contrast, RL approximates the
optimal solution of the Bellman equation without knowing the environment a priori, by iteratively updating its policy or value function.
Besides, a combination of RL and TL could yield superior results.

TABLE 1. Typical AI algorithms to enhance cellular networks.
AI modules

4G

5G

Services

MBB

eMBB/mMTC/URLLC

RRM

Granted

Granted or grant-free
Flexible bandwidth
Flexible symbol length









UE-specific on-demand

MM

Unified

On-demand









Location tracking/awareness

MANO

Simple

Operator-tailored









Enhanced self-organizing and
trouble-shooting capability

SPM

Unified

End-to-end NS









Network slice autoinstantiation

Sensing

Mining

Prediction

Reasoning

Intelligent 5G
Service-aware

TABLE 2. The evolution toward intelligent 5G.

Markov decision process (MDP). Therefore, reinforcement learning demonstrates strong pattern
recognition ability. Researchers in the field of cognitive radio usually model the dynamic transition
of spectrum availability as a Markov chain, and
extensively apply reinforcement learning methods (e.g., Q-learning and the actor-critic method
[12, 13]) to make the decision whether or not it is
suitable for secondary transmission in one primary
licensed spectrum, in terms of least interference
to the primary spectrum.
Table 1 summarizes what typical AI algorithms could solve. Apparently, AI can be used
to enhance the response of cellular networks to
stimuli by learning key network parameters. For
example, AI makes it possible to sense in a timely
manner the variations in network traffic, resource
utilization, user demand, and possible threats, and
further makes it possible to smartly coordinate

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

UEs, base stations (BSs), and network entities.
Table 2 illustrates functionalities upon which intelligent cellular networks may be built.
Figure 3 illustrates a possible AI-empowered
5G cellular network architecture, in which an
AI controller will act as an application on top of
ONOS or an independent network entity, and
communicate with RAN, CN, or global SDN controllers using open interfaces. Specifically, the AI
center will read service-level agreements (e.g.,
requirements on rate, coverage, failure duration,
redundancy, etc.), UE-level information (e.g.,
receiver category, battery limitation), network-level information (e.g., spectrum, number of serving
subscribers, QoS (quality of service), key performance indicators of network functions, scheduled
maintenance period, etc.), and infrastructure-level
information (e.g., server type, CPU, memory, storage, network standard) from the SDN control-

179

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

eMBB

URLLC

mMTC

Global controller

AI center

Power
control

User
Scheduling
association

Traffic Requirement...
... Service
awareness prediction cognition
Routing

Safety

CN controller

RAN controller

Pico and macro
BSs

Caching

Shared signal
processing pool

... Traffic

Data interface
UE
Resource ...

Gateways Switches MMEs MiddleBoxes

FIGURE 3. 5G cellular networks enabled by AI.

lers, so as to get in touch with cellular network
data such as traffic information, UEs, and network
resources. Afterward, the AI center will utilize its
embedded modules (e.g., sensing, mining, prediction, and reasoning) to process the obtained information, and feedback learning results, which may
include traffic characteristic analysis reports (e.g.,
service provisioning suggestion), UE-specific controlling information (e.g., serving priority, bandwidth allocation, mobility tracking command), and
network configuration notification (e.g., parameter adjustment, access method, network error
alert), to the SDN controllers. For example, AI
leverages the sensing module to track the location of UEs and uses the predicting module to
forecast the mobility trend based on the historical
moving pattern. Afterward, it takes advantage of
the reasoning module and proactively notifies the
UEs to update the location record, so as to prepare handover resources and save signaling cost
of mobility management.
On the other hand, 5G cellular networks can
maintain the normal working status under the
condition of potential damages (e.g., hacking) to
the AI center. Meanwhile, the AI center could
(semi-)periodically exchange information with the
SDN controllers in normal states, while it starts
emergent responses to schedule the minimum
required resources, once the conventional SDN
controllers encounter malfunctions. Therefore,
compared to the complete centralized architecture in conventional networks, the AI center and
the SDN controllers virtually constitute a multi-tier decision-making system, thus being able to
improve the network robustness.

Opportunities

In addition to the benefits to the RRM, MM,
MANO, and SPM, AI could further contribute to
solving the following issues.
Overloading of Cellular Network Data: Cellular networks generate vast volumes of records

180

by provisioning different services and types of
UEs under various channels, network entity
configurations, and energy consumption conditions. In particular, AI could exploit cellular
network data to forecast potential events and
predict traffic volume and help to pre-allocate
network resources. Meanwhile, AI provides a
unified means to mine the relevancy in such
abundant data and helps build a more concrete
mapping from service requirement to network
configuration. Furthermore, AI could generate
some operating reports to describe and summarize the subscriber and network experience
statistics, which is relevant when setting billing
and market policies.
Inter-Networking of Heterogeneous Cellular
Networks: Currently, operators have deployed
heterogeneous BSs in the 4G era, including picocells (providing high capacity), micro-cells (providing wide coverage for eMBB) and macro-cells
(supplying even wider coverage for signaling and
mMTC services). AI could analyze the requirements of one emerging service and contribute
to the selection of the most appropriate access
point to accommodate such a service, in terms
of SE, EE, or other more complicated criteria. For
example, AI could generate UE-specific policies
to make some UEs attach to pico BSs for larger
throughput while letting some UEs connect to
macro BSs to maintain fundamental information
exchange.
Difficulties in an Operator Supporting Subsystem: Usually, cellular networks merely rely
on thresholds to monitor network anomalies.
Therefore, operator engineers have to be vigilant
enough to systematic alerts and read user guides
to cope with unexpected network conditions. But
AI could use cellular network data to derive common network traffic patterns. Therefore, when networks experience traffic with unfamiliar patterns,
AI can start troubleshooting at the very beginning.
Similarly, networks could take advantage of AI to

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Knowledge
transfer

The BS
management
in Period 1
Actor

The BS
management
in Period 2
Exotic policy

Actor

Policy

Overall policy
Native policy

Critic

Value function
Critic
TD error

State

Cost
Environment:
the base stations

Action
BS 1: active
..
.
BS i: sleeping
..
.
BS N: active

Classical RL Algorithm

State

Value function

Cost
Environment:
the base stations

Action
BS 1: active
..
.
BS i: sleeping
..
.
BS N: active

RL Algorithm with data

FIGURE 4. The AI application framework for reinforcement learning-based greener cellular networks.

shield against potential safety threats, once AI perceives activity and address anomalies.
Challenges in Integrating RANs and CNs: Usually, the management of RANs and CNs is isolated, thus being not scale enough for network
evolution. As mobile edge computing becomes
more common, AI grants the controller more
power and capability to jointly schedule wireless
and wired resources, choose the appropriate content distribution and caching server (e.g., edge
and core server), and provide more unified protection against possible network threats.

Challenges

In spite of the apparent opportunities, there are
also challenges to apply AI to cellular networks.
First, in the 5G era, network data is a double-edged
sword. It definitively provides precious opportunities for AI to analyze trends and recognize
patterns. However, it is also difficult to derive a
simple model or pattern that perfectly matches
the data. Therefore, the derived results, which
possibly consist of lots of parameters, are very difficult to read and lose value for practical application. Second, in order to save and process cellular
network data in a timely manner, a significant
amount of storage and computational resources
are needed, and there might be threats to information security. Also, it usually is necessary to collect data in a centralized manner before applying
most AI algorithms. These factors inevitably add
to the computational capability of network entities and BSs and put a huge burden on the practical cost of products.

Use Case: Traffic-Aware
Greener Cellular Networks

In this section, we demonstrate how to take
advantage of AI to enhance the MANO, so as
to build greener cellular networks [12]. It is well
known that over 80 percent of power consumption takes place in RANs, especially the BS, since
the present BS deployment is on the basis of peak
traffic loads and generally stays active irrespec-

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

tive of the huge variations in traffic load. Therefore, benefiting from cloud pooling of baseband
resources, an SDN controller [8] can be leveraged
to sense traffic variations and adjust the working
status of under-utilized BSs, thus improving energy efficiency. Meanwhile, an AI center plays a crucial role in learning traffic variations and adjusting
BS switching policy. Here, we briefly talk about
two AI schemes to design traffic-aware greener
cellular networks, and show how AI could effectively solve this problem.
The most intuitive approach is to first forecast traffic loads in the near future and then
adjust the status of BSs, so as to satisfy the
predicted traffic loads but incur minimal energy consumption. For traffic prediction, we
can resort to the prediction module of AI. For
example, our previous work [14] modifies the
popular ARMA algorithm by incorporating traffic sparsity in both the temporal and spatial
domains and demonstrates the prediction error
for aggregate traffic records collected from
China Mobile could be as low as 15 percent,
in terms of normalized root mean square error.
Furthermore, we also predict the service-level
traffic with more bursty property in [15] and
demonstrate appealing accuracy as well, by
deriving the traffic model (e.g., a-stable models) from realistic traffic records and utilizing a
stable model-based compressive sensing algorithm. 1 On the other hand, in order to determine the appropriate BS switching policy, we
take advantage of the branch-and-bound algorithm, one kind of dynamic programming method, to solve the formulated optimization theory
[14] and show that along with practical traffic
variations, significant energy savings could still
be expected. In particular, when traffic hits to
the lowest point in the early morning (from 6
AM to 8 AM), the AI-induced BS switching policy merely costs 55 percent of the energy that
would be consumed if we emply no energy saving scheme.
In order to attain the BS switching solution, it is
also viable to merge the prediction and reasoning

1 It can be regarded as a success to combine the AI sensing and prediction modules.

181

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Based on the sensing,
prediction, and reasoning modules, AI could
contribute to designing
traffic-aware greener
cellular networks.
Meanwhile, such a
design represents the
typical methodology to
exploit AI and reflects
the effectiveness of AI
on future cellular networks.

modules together, by applying a Markov chain to
model possible traffic load variations and making
use of the actor-critic algorithm in Fig. 4 [13], a
reinforcement learning (RL) approach [12]. Specifically, the AI center would first estimate traffic
load variations based on the on-line experience.
Afterward, it can select one of the possible BS
switching operations under the estimated circumstance and then decrease or increase the probability of the same action to be later selected
according to the feedback cost information from
SDN controllers, by updating the policy and value
function. After repeating the actions and gradually knowing the corresponding costs, the AI center would know how to switch the BSs for one
specific traffic load profile. Meanwhile, as cellular
network traffic exhibits strong self-similarity, the
AI center could exchange the learned results in
different periods and optimize the strategy in a
faster manner. Our numerical results in a practical BS deployment scenario with simulated traffic
traces also show that without knowing traffic variations beforehand, this RL method [12] could still
converge quickly and approach the energy saving
performance of a solution with perfectly predicted traffic knowledge.
In a word, based on the sensing, prediction,
and reasoning modules, AI could contribute to
designing traffic-aware greener cellular networks.
Meanwhile, such a design represents the typical
methodology to exploit AI and reflects the effectiveness of AI on future cellular networks.

Conclusion

In this article, we have suggested applying AI
to cellular networks. We first discussed the initial intelligence emerging in nearly all aspects of
5G cellular networks, including radio resource
management, mobility management, general management and orchestration, and service
provisioning management. Following such intelligence, we argued it is still essential to bring
more AI functionalities to 5G cellular networks
by envisioning several prospective opportunities
and listing some potential challenges. Finally, we
provided a use case on how to obtain greener 5G cellular networks and demonstrated the
thrilling effectiveness of AI. We could boldly
argue that AI empowered 5G cellular networks
will successfully enter the central stage of a digitalized world.

Acknowledgment

This article is supported by the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents of China (No.
BX201600133), the Program for Zhejiang Leading Team of Science and Technology Innovation
(No. 2013TD20), the Zhejiang Provincial Technology Plan of China (No. 2015C01075), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
61501510), and the Natural Science Foundation
of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20150717).

References

[1] C. X. Wang et al., Cellular Architecture and Key Technologies for 5G Wireless Communication Networks, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 2, Feb. 2014, pp. 12230.
[2] J. G. Andrews et al., What Will 5G Be? arXiv:1405.2957 [cs,
math], May 2014; available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.2957.
[3] D. Soldani and A. Manzalini, Horizon 2020 and Beyond:
On the 5G Operating System for a True Digital Society,
IEEE Vehic. Tech. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, Mar. 2015, pp. 3242.

182

[4] A. Imran, A. Zoha, and A. Abu-Dayya, Challenges in 5G:
How to Empower SON with Big Data for Enabling 5G, IEEE
Network, vol. 28, no. 6, Nov. 2014, pp. 2733.
[5] X. Zhou et al., Network Slicing as a Service: Enable Industries Own Software-Defined Cellular Networks, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 7, Jul. 2016, pp. 14653.
[6] X. Wang, X. Li, and V. C. M. Leung, Artificial Intelligence-Based Techniques for Emerging Heterogeneous Network: State of the Arts, Opportunities, and Challenges, IEEE
Access, vol. 3, 2015, pp. 137991.
[7] C. L. I et al., New Paradigm of 5G Wireless Internet, IEEE
JSAC, vol. 34, no. 3, Mar. 2016, pp. 47482.
[8] R. Li et al., The Prediction Analysis of Cellular Radio Access
Network Traffic: From Entropy Theory to Networking Practice, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 6, June 2014, pp.
23844.
[9] 3GPP, Study on architecture for next generation system (TR
23.799), 2016; available: http: //www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/23799.htm.
[10] J. Mitola and G. Q. Maguire, Cognitive Radio: Making
Software Radios More Personal, IEEE Personal Commun.,
vol. 6, no. 4, Aug. 1999, pp. 1318.
[11] J. Qadir et al., Artificial Intelligence Enabled Networking,
IEEE Access, vol. 3, 2015, pp. 307982.
[12] R. Li et al., TACT: A Transfer Actor-Critic Learning Framework for Energy Saving in Cellular Radio Access Networks,
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 4, Apr. 2014, pp.
200011.
[13] V. Konda and J. Tsitsiklis, Actor-Critic Algorithms, SIAM J.
Contr. Optim., vol. 42, no. 4, 2000, pp. 114366.
[14] R. Li et al., Energy Savings Scheme in Radio Access Networks via Compressive Sensingbased Traffic Load Prediction, Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Tech. (ETT), vol. 25, no. 4,
Apr. 2014, pp. 46878.
[15] R. Li et al., The Learning and Prediction of Application-Level Traffic Data in Cellular Networks, arXiv:1606.04778 [cs],
June 2016; available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.04778

Biographies

R ongpeng L i received the Ph.D and B.E. from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China and Xidian University, Xian,
China, in June 2015 and June 2010, respectively, both as
excellent graduates. He is now a postdoctoral researcher
at Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. From August 2015
to September 2016, he was a researcher at the Wireless
Communication Laboratory, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.,
Shanghai, China. His research interests focus on applications of artificial intelligence, data-driven network design,
and resource allocation of cellular networks (especially
full-duplex networks). He was granted by the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents, which had a grant
ratio of 13 percent in 2016.
Zhifeng Zhao (corresponding author) is an associate professor
with the College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He received the Ph.D. degree in
communication and information systems from the PLA University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 2002. From
September 2002 to December 2004, he was a postdoctoral
researcher at Zhejiang University. His research areas include
cognitive radio, wireless multi-hop networks (ad hoc, mesh,
WSN, etc.), wireless multimedia network and green communications.
Xuan Zhou is a senior architect with the Service Provider Operation Lab (SPO Lab) of Huawei Technologies. He received his
Ph.D. in communication and information systems from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. From 2009 to 2014, he worked
as a system engineer at China Mobile Zhejiang Company. His
research efforts focus on innovative service and network management in 5G, network function virtualization, and software-defined networks. He is also the architect of the worlds first 5G
end-to-end network slicing demo, which was shown at Mobile
World Congress (MWC) 2016 in Barcelona, Spain.
G uoru D ing [S10, M14, SM16] received his B.S. degree
(hons.) in electrical engineering from Xidian University, Xian,
China, in 2008, and his Ph.D. degree (hons.) in communications
and information systems from the College of Communications
Engineering, Nanjing, China, in 2014. Since 2014, he has been
an assistant professor with the College of Communications Engineering. Since April 2015, he has been a postdoctoral research
associate at the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research interests include cognitive radio networks, massive MIMO, machine
learning, and big data analytics over wireless networks. He currently serves as a guest editor of the IEEE Journal on Selected

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Areas in Communications. He was a recipient of the Best Paper
Awards from EAI MLICOM 2016, IEEE VTC 2014-Fall, and IEEE
WCSP 2009.
Y an C hen received her B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University in 2004 and 2009, respectively. She was a
visiting researcher at the University of Science and Technology
(HKUST) from 2008 to 2009. In 2009, she joined Huawei
Technologies (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. She was the team leader
and project manager of the internal project Green Radio Excellence in Architecture and Technology (GREAT) from 2010 to
2013, during which time she was also the project leader of
the umbrella project Green Transmission Technologies (GTT)
at the GreenTouch TM Consortium. Since 2013, she has been
the technical leader and project manager of the internal 5G
air interface design project. Her current research interests are
more toward future communication system design to efficiently
support the multiplexing of different service scenarios with
diversified requirements.

IEEE Wireless Communications  October 2017

Z hongyao W ang received a B.Sc. in mathematics from the
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China in 2009. He joined the Deep Algorithm Department of
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China in 2013, where he currently
is a staff engineer. From 2010 to 2013, he worked in ASML
(Brion) as a software engineer. He has focused on anti-fraud,
prediction, and recommendation in the past few years. He is
now responsible for user profile and ID-mapping, which are two
key fundamental infrastructures inside Alibaba group.
H onggang Z hang is a professor with Zhejiang University,
China, and was the International Chair Professor of Excellence
at the Universit Europenne de Bretagne and Suplec, France
from 2012 to 2014. He is also an honorary visiting professor
with the University of York, UK. He served as the chair of
the Technical Committee on Cognitive Networks of the IEEE
Communications Society from 2011 to 2012. He is currently
involved in research on green communications, serving as the
series editor for the IEEE Communications Magazine series on
Green Communications and Computing Networks.

183

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on March 13,2022 at 09:59:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

