See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/253386773

Intelligent Cities: R&D offshoring, web 2.0 product development and
globalization of innovation systems
Article  January 2009
CITATIONS

READS

42

390

2 authors:
Nicos Komninos

Eleni Sefertzi

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

87 PUBLICATIONS 4,436 CITATIONS

9 PUBLICATIONS 131 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

PhD on Regional Innovation systems measurement and evaluation View project

Online S3: a H2020 project on digital platforms for smart specialisation View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Nicos Komninos on 01 October 2014.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Intelligent Cities: R&D offshoring, web 2.0 product development and
globalization of innovation systems
N. Komninos1 and E. Sefertzi2

Abstract: In the cities and regions of the twentieth first century a radical turn is taking place as information and
communication technologies are converging with the innovation-led regional economies, innovative clusters and
agglomerations. Intelligent cities are part of the orientation towards the creation of environments that improve
our cognitive skills, our ability to learn, foresee, and innovate. The paper discusses the driving forces sustaining
the rise of intelligent cities, such as the globalization of innovation clusters and networks, open innovation, and
web-based collaborative environments. Then we look at the movements shaping them - local initiatives around
the world, European Living Labs, and applications developed by large companies like IBM, MS and CISCO.
The last part of the paper focuses on the planning challenges for building intelligent cities and interactive
systems of innovation. We discuss the problem of integration among the physical, institutional and digital
dimensions of intelligent cities and the bridges that connect these three spatialities.

Key words: Intelligent cities; innovation systems; global innovation; collective intelligence; web 2.0

1. Introduction
Cities are changing. A new paradigm of city development and planning has arisen from the actual wave of
globalization, emerging technologies, virtuality, and the collective intelligence of the web. Cities in Europe,
USA, and Asia respond to these trends by a set of new strategies, namely intelligent city strategies. Well known
cases are Living Labs in Europe, Singapores iN 2015 strategy, Malaysia Multimedia Super Corridor, Floridas
high tech corridor, and a series of innovation clusters / global hubs such as Arabianranta, Zaragoza Milla
Digital, Seoul Digital Media City.
Intelligent cities highlight a key aspect of this new paradigm relating to the creation of environments that
improve the cognitive and learning skills of the population and the knowledge and innovation capabilities of
organizations located within them. Intelligent cities are territories in which the local system of innovation is
enhanced by digital collaboration spaces, interactive tools, and embedded systems. Digital spaces, electronic
devices, information systems and online services sustain a series of new urban functions related to knowledge
creation, technology transfer, innovation, and global marketing and delivery. Virtual spaces and embedded
systems are generating a wave of hybrid environments (global digital ecosystems, Living Labs, i-hubs, COINs,
smart cities, e-gov, digital cities, U-communities, intelligent environments, etc.) which in turn amplify local
creativities, networking, experimentation and innovation. The city gains innovation capability, which is
translated into increased competitiveness, a better environment, more jobs and wealth.

2. Intelligent cities and globalization of innovation
For more than 20 years innovation has been a central driving force of urban and regional development. A rich
literature corroborates this orientation; already the 6th Periodic Report on the social and economic situation and
development of the regions of the European Union (1999) documented that the actual regional development of
Europe is based on factors of knowledge, innovation, and geographical accessibility. Innovation-led or
knowledge-based development of cities and regions has become the model which most cities and regions try to
adopt and adapt it to their particular conditions. Central element in linking innovation and regional development
is the concept of the regional system of innovation, which denotes the cooperation nexus among R&D,
1
2

URENIO Research Unit, Aristotle University, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece
URENIO Research Unit, Aristotle University, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece

Paper presented at the Second Knowledge Cities Summit 2009, Shenzhen, China, 5-7 November 2009
(http://www.kcsummit2009.com/eng/index.html)

1

technology institutions, innovation funding, and production organizations located closely, as driving force of
innovation and regional development.
However, recent trends reveal a profound transformation of regional systems of innovation towards more
outward and global profiles. Several factors contribute to this change: a new geographical mobility of R&D,
R&D offshoring, new supply chain architectures shaped by flagship networks of multinational companies, rise
of global clusters of excellence, people-led product innovation, web 2.0 and participatory product development.
Altogether these changes create a new spatiality of innovation systems, shaped by global innovation networks
and digital collaboration networks, and reveal a new way of innovation, more global, open, and participatory.
Intelligent cities is a planning paradigm which corresponds to this type of innovation spatiality shaped by
global innovation networks and web-based collaboration.
The globalization of innovation networks is a contemporary trend deeply influencing local innovation clusters
and regional systems of innovation. Decentralizing business units and operations to every corner of the world
has become routine practice, but now companies are also redistributing their product innovation, even basic and
applied research, across global R&D networks (Ernst 2006; United Nations 2005). Cisco has R&D facilities in
Bangalore; Toyota in Thailand; Nokia operates nine satellite design studios located within targeted nations like
India (Bangalore), China (Beijing), Brazil, where researchers and designers work to customize products to each
market (BusinessWeek 2007). The UNCTAD survey on the internationalization of R&D shows that China has
become the most attractive destination for non-equity R&D collaboration (UNCTAD 2005). The majority of the
new R&D centers that multinational companies plan to open during the next years are to be located in India and
China. A recent survey conducted by the Economist Intelligent Unit (2004) documents the many reasons that
drive the actual relocation of R&D. Reduced R&D costs and the ability to take advantage of local pools of
skilled labor are among the most important delocalization factors. However, new factors have also appeared
alongside the classical factors of FDI attraction (proximity to local markets and bypass of tariff barriers):
tapping into pools of local know-how; taking advantage of local creativities; avoiding relocation expenses; and
shrinking of R&D budgets.
The global decentralization of R&D and innovation has a direct impact on local and innovation clusters and
regional innovation systems as well. It is well documented that innovation activities tend to cluster. In Europe,
for instance, R&D laboratories and companies active in R&D are concentrated to a great extent in a series of
urban islands of innovation and innovative regions in north-west Europe and Scandinavia. This spatial
polarization of innovation is explained by the horizontal and vertical knowledge interaction within the clusters,
local knowledge spillovers, and the embedded tacit knowledge thesis. Recent evidence however maintains that
international relationships and global knowledge flows are crucial sources of creativity and innovativeness
within local innovation clusters. Successful clusters are building and managing resources from around the globe
(Bathelt et al. 2004; Owen-Smith and Powell 2004). There is growing evidence that even in the most innovative
clusters an important proportion of their knowledge and customer bases are not local (Gertler and Wolfe 2005).
Local clusters and innovative cities are going global to take advantage of external resources (supply chains and
knowledge inputs), market opportunities (suppliers and customers), and the attractiveness of global funds and
investments (Uhlmann 2008). In developing countries, innovation offshoring tends also to cluster. Offshoring
takes place in a limited number of cities and regions in India, China, Malaysia, and in global city-regions like
Singapore and Hong-Kong, giving birth to agglomerations of high-tech activities and innovative clusters.
Confronting these trends of intense R&D mobility and innovation globalization, many communities and cities
have launched intelligent city strategies. Public authorities in Singapore, Taipei (China), Spokane (US), Seoul
and Songdo (S. Korea), Cyberjaya and Putrajaya (Malaysia), in many cities of Europe, and in smart
communities in the US have implemented plans to make their cities more intelligent, open, global and
innovative. In the planning discourse of these cases, the connection between innovation, broadband, and
globalization is more than evident (IDA 2009, Bunnell 2002).

3. Movements shaping intelligent cities
Fragments of intelligent cities are emerging all over the world, but still we are very far from the creation of
amazing intelligent environments that open minds and transform radically human skills and mental capabilities.
This is a weakness both of technology in the field of intelligent environments and of integration of technologies
with innovation institutions and city activities. However, some major shaping movements have already
appeared.

2

Local initiatives  The ICF awards: An extremely valuable source of current applications and local
experimentations in the field is to be found in the Intelligent Community Forum and the cities selected by ICF
since 2001 as top intelligent cities (ICF 2009). Forty cities and regions appear on this list covering a variety of
sizes and roles: small cities like Pirai with 23 thousand people to multimillion cities like Tianjin with a
population of 11 million; global metropolis like New York and small rural communities like Bario, Malaysia;
industrial cities and city suburbs (Table 1). Among them, awards for Top Intelligent Communities were received
by LaGrange, US (2000); New York, US (2001); Calgary, Canada (2002); Glasgow, UK (2004) Mitaka, Japan
(2005); Taipei, Taiwan (2006), Waterloo, Ontario, Canada (2007), Gagnam District-Seoul, S. Korea (2008), and
Stockholm, Sweden (2009).
Table 1: Top-seven intelligent communities selected by the ICF 2001-2009

2001

2002
200304
2005
2006
2007

Asia  Australia
(11)
-Bario, Malaysia
-Singapore
-Bangalore, India
-Seoul, S. Korea
-Taipei, Taiwan
-Victoria, Australia
-Yokosuka, Japan
-Mitaka, Japan
-Tianjin, China
-Gagnam District Seoul
-Ichikawa, Japan

Americas
(18)
-LaGrange, Georgia, US
-Nevada, Missouri, US
-New York, US
-Calgary, Alberta, CA
-Florida, high tech corridor, US
-Spokane, Washington, US
-Western Valley, N. Scotia, CA

Europe
(9)
-Ennis, Ireland
-Sunderland, UK

-Pirai, Brazil
-Toronto, Ontario, CA
-Cleveland, Ohio, US
-Waterloo, Ontario, CA
-Ottawa-Gatineau, Ontario, CA

-Issy-les-Moulineux, France

2008

-Fredericton, New Brunswick, CA
-Northeast Ohio, US
-Westchester, New York, US
-Winston-Salem, N. Carolina, US

2009

-Bristol, Virginia, US
-Moncton, New Brunswick, CA

-Glasgow, UK

-Manchester, UK
-Dundee, Scotland, UK
-Tallinn, Estonia

-Eindhoven, Netherlands
-Stockholm, Sweden

* Each community appears one time only, the year of its first selection
Source: http://www.intelligentcommunity.org
These cities were characterized as intelligent communities with respect to five criteria of excellence in
information and communication technology, knowledge and innovation: Broadband infrastructure, which
evaluates the local capacity for digital communication. Knowledge workforce, which measures the capacity of
the population for qualified work in knowledge-intensive activities. Innovation, which assesses how far
communities have gone in creating an innovation-friendly environment that attracts creative people and creative
businesses. Digital democracy, which assesses the government and private sector programs to overcome the
digital divide. Marketing, this assesses the attractiveness of a community and its competitive offerings with
respect to other cities and regions.
In the cities which received ICF prizes, two strategies can be discerned. The first is a purely IT strategy focused
on information technology with core elements broadband, IT training, and e-services. Characteristic
examples are Singapore, Seoul and Taipei. The second is a strategy focused on knowledge-based development
and the local innovation economy and combines new economy structures (clusters, high-tech districts,
innovation centers, venture capital funds) with broadband infrastructure and e-services. Characteristic examples
here are New York, Florida, Glasgow, Yokosuka, Waterloo, and Stockholm.
EU Living Labs: Another major initiative in promoting the integration of localities, ICTs, and innovation is the
EU Living Labs movement. LLs started as a European platform for collaboration and opening innovative

3

markets in the field of mobile applications and technologies to European citizens, companies, and researchers. It
is targeted at cities and regions advancing their telecom infrastructure and digital services in view of becoming
significant transaction points for global flows of goods, services, people and ideas. Infrastructures are improved;
public policies are adapted to firm-specific assets; clusters of competencies are maintained and advanced by
applied research and experimental development, education and training. The entire urban environment becomes
a living laboratory for prototyping and testing new technology application and new methods of generating and
fostering innovation processes in real time.
The definition of Living Lab given by the European Network of Living Labs (ENOLL) is that a Living Lab is
an open innovation environment in real-life settings in which user-driven innovation is the co-creation process
for new services, products and societal infrastructures. Living Labs encompass societal and technological
dimensions simultaneously in a business-citizens-government-academia partnership (Bergvall-Kreborn and
Sthlbrst 2009). A Living Lab can be a city area in which operates a full-scale urban laboratory and proving
ground for inventing, prototyping and marketing new technology applications; it may include interactive testing,
but is managed as an innovation environment well beyond the test bed functions. As a city-based innovation
environment the Living Lab can take advantage of the pools of creative talent, the affluence of socio-cultural
diversity, and the unpredictability of inventiveness and imagination in the urban setting (Komninos 2008).
Ongoing Living Labs initiatives can be found in most major cities of Europe. ENoLL is now based on a total of
129 Living Labs, including 10 affiliated Living Labs from non European Countries. In these places, a real-life
open innovation environment has been set in which user-driven innovation takes place and co-creation processes
in many different sectors of economic activity, not only mobile devices and ICTs.
Big three: Large IT and telecommunication companies such as CISCO, IBM, MS, have also developed
solutions for intelligent cities. In February 2009, CISCO, launched the global Intelligent Urbanization initiative
from Bangalore and signed a MoU with the local government to develop a roadmap for an intelligent and
sustainable Bangalore City. The global Intelligent Urbanization initiative was designed to help cities around the
world using the network as the fourth utility for integrated city management, better quality of life for citizens,
and economic development. Bringing together a broad portfolio of products, services, partners and solutions
across CISCO, the initiative is initially focused on intelligent, sustainable solutions for public safety and
security, transportation, buildings, energy, health care and education. As an example of how technology can be
used to improve security operations, Cisco proposed its own internal Security Operations Centre. Real-time
security monitoring and alerts, video surveillance tools, acoustic sensors, card-readers with biometric
recognition, automatic alerts and security activation systems were the highlights of this environment.
Microsoft is working with Coventry University and Birmingham City Council to establish Birmingham as the
first UK Intelligent City able to showcase new and innovative applications. The Intelligent City Proof of
Concept is about an interoperable technology platform focusing on transport. The objectives include
demonstrating the intelligent city vision for Birmingham and creating a service layer platform integrated with
existing data / services, managing journeys across devices and modes of transport, empowering individuals to
make more informed, smarter choices, and describing the impact on travel patterns, and economic and
environmental issues.
IBM announced its SmarterCities program as part of the companys initiative for an Intelligent Planet. The
program was created to stimulate economic growth and quality of life in cities and metropolitan areas with the
activation of new approaches of thinking and acting in the urban ecosystem. Interconnected and instrumented
smart technologies offer a real-time integrated view of complex city systems, enabling administrators to monitor
operations, improve performance and respond to the needs of their jurisdictions each day. IBMs initiative
focuses on seven areas, education, health, safety, transport, water management, energy, and public governance
in each of which the company described a series of best practices, strategies, technologies and applications
(IBM 2009). The approach is comprehensive, as the problems are not addressed only in terms of technology, but
management practices and institutional arrangements are also taken into consideration.

4. Planning challenges
The above movements bring on the surface a number of planning challenges linked to the multi-dimensional
spatiality and architecture of intelligent cities, which is simultaneously social, physical, institutional, and digital.

4

Integration: Intelligent cities are organized as multi-layer territorial systems of innovation, bringing together
knowledge-intensive activities, innovation institutions, and digital communication spaces. These layers reflect
both the different dimensions of intelligence (human, collective, artificial) and the deployment of innovation on
physical, institutional and digital spaces.
 The first layer includes the citys knowledge-intensive activities in manufacturing and services that are
usually organized into clusters. The population of the city, knowledge workers, and innovative
companies are the fundamental elements upon which intelligent cities are constructed. Proximity in
physical space is important, integrating enterprises, production units, and service providers into a
coherent innovation system. Critical factor at this level is the intellectual capital of the city population.
 The second layer includes institutional mechanisms for knowledge creation and social co-operation in
technology and innovation. Characteristic examples are institutions enhancing R&D, strategic
intelligence, venture capital financing, technology transfer, and collaborative new product
development. These are mechanisms that promote cooperation within the clusters comprising the city,
between different clusters in the city, and between innovation processes taking place on physical and
digital space. Critical factors at this level are institutional thickness and collective intelligence of the
community.
 The third layer includes digital networks and e-services that enable online cooperation. These tangible
and intangible infrastructures create virtual innovation environments based on multimedia tools and
interactive technologies, which facilitate different innovation processes from market and technology
intelligence to collaborative new product development and process innovation based on transactionsaving technologies. Critical factor at this level is content management, information automation,
intelligent agents, virtual networking and web 2.0 technologies.
A major challenge for building intelligent cities is integration among the above three layers and the making of
bridges that connect their physical, institutional, and digital spatiality. Analysis of intelligent places shows that
most bridges are organizational and institutional in nature and highly dependent on the digital technologies
implemented.
Technology: Computer Aided Design (CAD) and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are major
technologies enabling a digital management of urban space. Intelligent cities, however, rely on a different set of
technologies, web-based applications, virtual collaboration tools, and u-communities (Anttiroiko, 2009). Main
difference of web-based tools with respect to CAD and GIS are that they help creating digital operational
spatialities instead of representing digitally physical space. Furthermore, instead of two technologies we are
dealing with an ocean of applications and virtual tools. On the website of URENIO we created a collection of
representative collaborative tools for intelligent cities (http://www.urenio.org/digital-collaboration-tools/). These
tools are organized in four categories (content management, technology transfer, collaborative product
development, and digital marketing) and highlight how digital collaboration may contribute to main innovation
processes. Web 2.0 offered additional means in mobilizing and organizing collective intelligence with
application like Innocentive, iBridge, CrowdSpirit, IdeaScale, Peer-to-Patent, and other.
The dominant software stacks used in such collaborative environments are open source. The integrated,
optimized, open-source Apache, MySQL, PHP/Perl/Python (AMP) stack seems to be the preferred platform for
building and deploying new Web applications and services.
Today cloud computing makes a new step of efficiency and economy to this environment, delivering IT
resources on demand and opening up new business models and market opportunities. In some ways cloud
computing is a metaphor for Internet-based services and the increasing movement of virtual computing and
hosting data resources onto the Web. It abstracts the software application platform from the underlying
hardware infrastructure, freeing developers and users from the need to poses hardware. In cloud computing, the
users data and software execution are in the cloud (the Internet) and the network becomes the computer, while
the use of resources follows the model a utility pricing (Sun 2009). Cloud computing by delivering higher
efficiency, massive scalability, and faster, easier software development, with lower costs opens new windows
for the massive involvement of people in the creation of digital spaces and e-services, and further development
of intelligent cities as collaborative environments.
Sectoral and district-based strategies: In a previous paper (Komninos 2009) we argued that three types of
strategies predominate in the making of intelligent cities. By developing sector-focused, cluster-based, or large
scale intelligent city strategies, administrations set in motion mechanisms that enhance substantially the
innovation system in their territory. Working recently on the project Intelligent Thessaloniki we found that e-

5

services and IT applications for collaboration and innovation vary considerably from one city district to another.
The project concerned the design of broadband networks and digital services in six districts of the city of
Thessaloniki: the port area, the commercial city centre, the university campus, the Technopolis IT business park,
the museum of science and technology, and the airport. The objective was to enhance the innovation potential of
these districts through the deployment of digital services and collaborative spaces. In each district we tried
connecting its particular activities with innovation support processes and online collaborative spaces and tools.
The difference of applications from one district to another is impressive, which advocates in favor of a sectoral
approach and strategy enabling economies of scope and transferability of practices and applications.
Measuring: Defining metrics in the field of intelligent cities is driven by two principles: (1) to compare
localities between themselves and learn from the best, and (2) to understand the internal dynamics of intelligent
cities, define weaknesses, and recognize the effort needed to overcome them. Two methodologies predominate
in these attempts: benchmarking and modeling. Comparing localities that have implemented intelligent cities
strategies is the scope of territorial benchmarking. We may benchmark any type of organization, institution or
geographical entity, provided that we have comparative data from other similar entities. Modeling is more
advanced methodology and requires deeper analysis, testing, and understanding. It is mainly about the
relationships of the variables that characterize intelligent cities, analyzing how different structuring aspects of
the city interrelate; and to what extent performance variables of innovation are dependent on the structuring
variables of human skills, institutions, and digital infrastructure. Both, benchmarking and modeling are based on
the use of quantitative indicators, which have to cover the entire field of intelligent cities activities and
functions. In Table 2 we have selected around 40 indicators organized into four blocks corresponding to
fundamental building blocks of intelligent cities.
Table 2: Forty indicators for capturing intelligent cities performance
Education and skills
Knowledge and innovation
Digital infrastructure
of the population
institutions
and e-services
1. Population with tertiary1. Number of university
1. City area covered by
level education (% of 25-64
students (% of total
cable networks (% of
years age class)
population)
total area)
2. Participation in life-long
2. Number of university staff
2. City area covered by Wilearning ( % of 25-64 years
(per million of population)
Fi networks (% of total
age class)
area)
3. New S&E graduates (% of 3. Total R&D expenditure ( % 3. City area covered by
20-29 years age class)
of GDP)
xDSL networks (% of
total area)
4. Researchers in industry and 4. Public R&D expenditure
4. Computers (per million
services (% of total
(GERD as % of GDP)
of population)
workforce)
5. Researchers in the public
5. Business R&D expenditure 5. Internet connections (%
sector (% of total
(BERD as % of GDP)
of population)
researchers)
6. Researchers in the private
6. Business spending for
6. Broadband connections
sector (% of total
licensing (% of turnover)
(% of population)
researchers)
7. Employment of tertiary7. Number of incubators (per
7. Users of e-gov services
level graduates (% of total
million of population)
(% of population)
employment)
8. Employment in medium
8. Number of S&T Parks (per 8. City enterprises owning a
and high-tech
million of population)
website (% of total
manufacturing (% of total
enterprises)
workforce)
9. Employment in high-tech
9. Number of Technology
9. City enterprises involved
services (% of total
Transfer and Innovation
in B2B or B2C (% of
workforce)
Centers (per million of
total enterprises)
population)
10. Creative class (% of
10. Venture capital funding
10. Digital services
employment in creative
(% of total business
providers (% of ICT
industries)
funding)
companies)

Innovation performance
1. EPO patent applications
(per million of population)
2. New trade marks (per
million of population)
3. Innovative enterprisesmanufacturing (% of all
manufacturing enterprises)
4. Innovative enterprisesservices (% of all services
enterprises)
5. Enterprises having internal
R&D department (% of all
enterprises)
6. Sales of new-to-market
products (% of turnover)
7. Sales of new-to-firm not
new-to-market products (%
of turnover)
8. New companies creation (%
of total enterprises)

9. Exports high-tech products
(% of total exports)

10. Exports high-tech services
(% total exports)

Out of these metrics four axis of intelligent city development can be defined. Three of them deal with input
factors (skills, knowledge institutions, digital spaces), while the fourth measures outputs (innovation). A 4dimensions radar chart thus may be defined measuring the progress made in each of the four fundamental

6

dimensions of an intelligent city. We should, however, keep in mind that intelligent city strategies successfully
followed within a particular region may not necessarily generate the relevant results if copied to another region.
Future directions: Today intelligent cities offer an attractive prospect, a strategy and a vision for the future,
rather than an actuality that has been realized. Key issue in making such environments is to understand and
manage the linkages between the physical, institutional and digital aspects of innovation and how these
interconnections activate knowledge functions, release creativities and transform knowledge into new products.
Intelligent cities can achieve more global and interactive systems of innovation enabling, through the digital
interaction, an extension of innovation collaboration networks and the participation of users. These are two
novel elements (global innovation networks / user participation to innovation) that broadband communication
and digital collaborative spaces bring into local / regional systems of innovation.
However, the precise way that digital collaboration enables the participation of overseas researchers, suppliers,
innovators, customers, and end-users to innovation processes has to be defined with respect to the functional
differentiation and complexity of the city. Different forms of IT applications, virtual spaces and novel e-services
have to be defined in different city districts of industry, technology, university, CBD, shopping, port, and airport
areas. Intelligent cities are emerging as dynamic re-arrangement of networks, nodes and clusters. The creation of
intelligent innovation ecosystems is a major challenge for the future.

References
Anttiroiko, A-V. (2009) Urban u-community: a new dimension of urban development, Int. J. Innovation and
Regional Development, Vol. 1, No. 4, 464483.
Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A. and Maskell, P. (2004) Clusters and knowledge: local buzz, global pipelines and the
process of knowledge creation, Progress in Human Geography, Vol. 28, No. 1, 3156.
Bergvall-Kreborn, B. and Sthlbrst, A. (2009) Living Lab: an open and citizen-centric approach for
innovation, Int. J. Innovation and Regional Development, Vol. 1, No. 4, 356370.
Bunnell, T. (2002) Multimedia Utopia? A Geographical Critique of High-Tech Development in Malaysias
Multimedia Super Corridor, Antipode, 34 (2), 265295.
BusinessWeek (2007) Inside Innovation - Special Report, Business Week August 10, 2007. Online
<http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/di_special/20070830insideinnov.htm>.
Economist Intelligence Unit (2004) Scattering the Seeds of Invention: The globalization of research and
development. Online <http://graphics.eiu.com/files/ad_pdfs/RnD_GLOBILISATION_WHITEPAPER.pdf>.
Ernst, D. (2006) Innovation Offshoring: Asias emerging role in global innovation networks, East-West Center
Special Reports, No 10, online <http://www.eastwestcenter.org/fileadmin/stored/pdfs/SR010.pdf>.
European Commission (1999) 6th Periodic Report on the social and economic situation and development of the
regions of the European Union, Luxembourg, Official Publications of the European Communities.
Gertler, M. and Wolfe D. (2005) Spaces of knowledge flows: clusters in a global context paper presented at
the DRUID Tenth Anniversary Summer Conference 2005 on Dynamics of Industry and Innovation:
Organizations, Networks and Systems, Copenhagen, June 27-29, 2005.
 (2009)  smarter planet  smarter cities. Online <http://www05.ibm.com/uk/smarterplanet/topics/cities/index1.html >.
IDA (2009) Innovation. Integration. Internationalisation - Singapore: An intelligent nation, a global city,
powered by infocomm, iN2015 Steering Committee. Online
<http://www.ida.gov.sg/doc/About%20us/About_Us_Level2/20071005103551/01_iN2015_Main_Report.pdf>.

7

ICF (2009) Intelligent Community Awards. Online
<http://www.intelligentcommunity.org/index.php?submenu=Awards&src=gendocs&ref=Top7&category=Event
s >.
Komninos N. (2008) Intelligent Cities and Globalisation of Innovation Networks, London and New York:
Routledge.
Komninos, N. (2009) Intelligent cities: towards interactive and global innovation environments, Int. J.
Innovation and Regional Development, Vol. 1, No. 4, 337355.
Owen-Smith, J. and Powell, W.W. (2004) Knowledge networks as channels and conduits: the effects of
spillovers in the Boston biotechnology community, Organisation Science, 15, 5-21.
Sun (2009) Open source and cloud computing: on-demand, innovative IT on a massive scale, online
<http://www.newformat.se/documents/ose/sun-open-source-and-cloud-computing-white-paper-2009-06.pdf>
Uhlmann, R. (2008) Global integration of regional clusters IRE conference, Rennes June 2008.
United Nations (2005) UNCTAD survey on the internationalization of R&D. Occasional note. Online
<http://www.unctad.org/en/docs/webiteiia200512_en.pdf>.

8

View publication stats

