See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/329263868

Social equity shapes zone-selection: Balancing aquatic biodiversity
conservation and ecosystem services delivery in the trans-national Danube
River Basin
Article in Science of The Total Environment  November 2018
DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.348

CITATIONS

READS

18

575

13 authors, including:
Sami Domisch

Karan Kakouei

Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries

Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries

75 PUBLICATIONS 2,243 CITATIONS

18 PUBLICATIONS 170 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Javier Martnez-Lpez

Kenneth Bagstad

University of Granada

United States Geological Survey

72 PUBLICATIONS 957 CITATIONS

92 PUBLICATIONS 4,252 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Identification of cliamte sensitive zones across Nepal Himalaya View project

FramWat - Framework for improving water balance and nutrient mitigation by applying small water retention measures View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Sami Domisch on 11 December 2018.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv

Social equity shapes zone-selection: Balancing aquatic biodiversity
conservation and ecosystem services delivery in the transboundary
Danube River Basin
Sami Domisch a, * , Karan Kakouei a , Javier Martnez-Lpez b , Kenneth J. Bagstad c , Ainhoa Magrach b ,
Stefano Balbi b , Ferdinando Villa b , Andrea Funk d , Thomas Hein d, e , Florian Borgwardt d , Virgilio Hermoso f ,
Sonja C. Jhnig a,1 , Simone D. Langhans a, b, g,1
a

Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Mggelseedamm 310, 12587 Berlin, Germany
BC3  Basque Centre for Climate Change, Leioa 48940, Spain
c
U.S. Geological Survey, Geosciences & Environmental Change Science Center, P.O. Box 25046, MS 980, Denver, CO 80225, USA
d
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Institute of Hydrobiology and Aquatic Ecosystem Management, Gregor Mendel Strae 33, Vienna 1180, Austria
e
WasserCluster Lunz, WG Biger, Lunz, Austria
f
Centre de Cincia i Tecnologia Forestal de Catalunya, Sant Llorenc de Monunys, Km 2, Solsona, 25280, Lleida, Spain
g
University of Otago, Department of Zoology, 340 Great King Street, Dunedin 9016, New Zealand
b

H I G H L I G H T S

G R A P H I C A L

A B S T R A C T

 We
illustrate
ecosystem-based
management in the transboundary
Danube River Basin.
 We optimised biodiversity and
ecosystem services across countries
in the Danube Basin.
 Social equity may entail that wealthy
countries pay more for conservation.
 We included social equity as a cost,
reecting countries wealth and basin
share.
 Our generic framework can be
applied and extended to other realms
and regions.

A R T I C L E

I N F O

Article history:
Received 31 July 2018
Received in revised form 23 November 2018
Accepted 24 November 2018
Available online 28 November 2018
Editor: Damia Barcelo

A B S T R A C T
Freshwater biodiversity is declining, despite national and international efforts to manage and protect freshwater ecosystems. Ecosystem-based management (EBM) has been proposed as an approach that could more
eciently and adaptively balance ecological and societal needs. However, this raises the question of how
social and ecological objectives can be included in an integrated management plan. Here, we present a
generic model-coupling framework tailored to address this question for freshwater ecosystems, using three
components: biodiversity, ecosystem services (ESS), and a spatial prioritisation that aims to balance the spatial representation of biodiversity and ESS supply and demand. We illustrate this model-coupling approach
within the Danube River Basin using the spatially explicit, potential distribution of (i) 85 sh species as a
surrogate for biodiversity as modelled using hierarchical Bayesian models, and (ii) four estimated ESS layers

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: domisch@igb-berlin.de (S. Domisch).
1

These authors contributed equally.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.348
0048-9697/  2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

798
Keywords:
Ecosystem-based management
Species distribution model
Ecosystem services
ARIES
Marxan with Zones
Model coupling

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

produced by the Articial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services (ARIES) platform (with ESS supply dened
as carbon storage and ood regulation, and demand specied as recreation and water use). These are then
used for (iii) a joint spatial prioritisation of biodiversity and ESS employing Marxan with Zones, laying out
the spatial representation of multiple management zones. Given the transboundary setting of the Danube
River Basin, we also run comparative analyses including the country-level purchasing power parity (PPP)adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) and each countrys percent cover of the total basin area as potential
cost factors, illustrating a scheme for balancing the share of establishing specic zones among countries. We
demonstrate how emphasizing various biodiversity or ESS targets in an EBM model-coupling framework
can be used to cost-effectively test various spatially explicit management options across a multi-national
case study. We further discuss possible limitations, future developments, and requirements for effectively
managing a balance between biodiversity and ESS supply and demand in freshwater ecosystems.
 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

1. Introduction
In light of the strong anthropogenic pressures faced by freshwater
ecosystems, such as habitat degradation, pollution, ow regulation
and water extraction, freshwater biodiversity is currently facing a
crisis with observed population declines for many species (Ricciardi
and Rasmussen, 1999; Loh et al., 2005; Dudgeon et al., 2006). Given
both the growing awareness of the importance of ecosystem services
(ESS) provided by freshwater ecosystems (Aylward et al., 2005) and
their ineffective protection (Dudgeon et al., 2006), there is increasing recognition that new management schemes are required for
safeguarding freshwater ecosystems and the ESS they deliver to
people. For instance, the European Union has committed to designing a network of green and blue infrastructure (Maes et al., 2012),
highlighting the policy application when assessing the balance of
biodiversity and ESS.
One such management scheme is Ecosystem-Based Management (EBM), with its central principle to concurrently consider
biodiversity and human society as integral parts of the ecosystem
(Long et al., 2015; Langhans et al., in press). The key goal of EBM is
to protect and restore ecosystem resilience, while maintaining biodiversity and the provision of ESS. EBM principles were developed
in the 1970s (Caldwell, 1970), but moving from their conceptual to
practical implementations has been a major challenge (Slocombe,
1993; Leslie and McLeod, 2007). While the concept of EBM has a
long tradition in terrestrial (Slocombe, 1993) and marine realms
(Botsford et al., 1997), EBM in freshwater systems has been targeted somewhat more recently (Falkenmark, 2003). The complexity
of developing EBM measures for freshwater ecosystems can be
exemplied by looking, for instance, at Europes second longest
river, the Danube. The Danube comprises a highly stressed and
highly vulnerable system given its high level of socio-economic
usage (Hein et al., 2018). The high use of ESS, especially in a
transboundary setting with 19 involved countries whose demands
partially conict (Sommerwerk et al., 2010; Hein et al., 2018), can
carry potentially high costs for biodiversity (e.g., navigation and
locks have likely detrimental effects on sh migration). However,
because ESS are partly based on biodiversity itself (e.g., food webs
and food security, or recreation potential and aesthetic value), the
value to society of protecting biodiversity should be evident, particularly as science identies and demonstrates these linkages (Mace
et al., 2012).
This raises two questions: (1) how a balance between biodiversity and ESS could be achieved (Martnez-Fernndez et al., 2014), and
more importantly, (2) could such a balance be tested (or simulated)
in any given area of interest? A rst general and useful approximation can be achieved, for instance, using linkage frameworks (similar
to e.g., the DriverPressureStateImpactResponse, DPSIR framework; EEA, 1999). As shown by Knights et al. (2013) in the marine

realm, management measures can be achieved by assessing ecosystem complexity and evaluating impact chains across multiple marine
sectors and activities. Such an approach can help provide an overall picture of possible management options, for example, regarding
sustainable sheries. Linkage frameworks, however, lack the spatial
aspect that is crucial in riverine systems given their longitudinal connectivity. This is especially true for transboundary river basins such
as the Danube, where the locations of specic protection or management actions are important from a multi-national management
perspective.
Recently, Langhans et al. (in press) reviewed the requirements
for a successful EBM planning process, and highlighted several
needed components: knowledge of biodiversity, ESS, and decits
in reaching their targets, plus external scenarios, management
strategies and spatial planning, with the outcome being a spatial
optimisation plan that informs EBM implementation. The authors
laid out the theory behind a workow consisting of three elements: the spatial representation of (i) biodiversity, (ii) ESS, and
(iii) the concurrent spatial prioritisation of biodiversity and ESS
supply and demand. Langhans et al. (in press) propose three versions of this workow, which they term ultralight, light and
full versions. The ultralight version considers the spatial representation of the three elements at the present time step. Beside
evaluating the status quo, it allows the user to test how biodiversity
and ESS could be balanced by management zones sensu Abell et al.
(2007), given specic management targets (Fig. 1). The light workow adds complexity to the ultralight one by considering different
management strategies that are evaluated and ranked according to
relevant criteria, such as proximity to management targets, decits
in achieving biodiversity and ESS targets, and evaluating effectiveness, eciency, and social equity of management scenarios. Here,
effectiveness refers to which degree management impacts the ecological outcomes, whereas eciency refers to the benet-to-cost
ratio. Social equity, in turn, refers to the fair treatment of individuals or groups (Langhans et al., in press). Finally, the full workow
adds data-driven scenarios (e.g., potential alterations in biodiversity and ESS under climate or land use change impacts) to the light
version, allowing for detailed estimates of how and where spatial biodiversity and ESS management zones could be planned. As
opposed to a binary protect vs. non-protect scheme when laying
out reserve network plans (Margules and Pressey, 2000), zones with
varying intensities of conservation and anthropogenic use decrease
the area required for strict conservation, while still meeting species
protection targets (e.g., by up to 62% as shown by Hermoso et al.
(2016) in the Iberian Peninsula). The three versions differ in their
complexity, and hence also in their data requirements. While the
ultralight workow can be achieved with data that can be readily
developed (spatial biodiversity and ESS estimates), the light and
full versions require additional data and information on external

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

799

Fig. 1. The ultralight ecosystem-based management (EBM) workow as proposed by Langhans et al. (in press). The model coupling consists of (i) spatially explicit, range-wide
estimates of biodiversity using species distribution models (SDMs, left) and (ii) spatially explicit ecosystem-service models (ESS, right) within a dened study area. The output of
these two models is then used to spatially prioritise biodiversity and ESS supply and demand.
Source: Figure modied after Langhans et al. (in press).

scenarios, as well as stakeholder involvement (Langhans et al., in
press).
Our aim in this paper is to provide a spatially explicit and generic
model-coupling framework that can be adapted to virtually any
region, following the theoretical workow proposed by Langhans et
al. (in press) and shown in Fig. 1. For demonstration purpose, we
illustrate the ultralight workow, and discuss data requirements and
future developments required for light or full applications.
In a rst step, we assess the spatial representation of both biodiversity and ESS supply/demand. In a subsequent step, we perform
a spatial prioritisation, balancing biodiversity and ESS into different
management zones according to user-dened management targets.
We illustrate the EBM model-coupling framework for the Danube
River Basin. We use the potential distribution of 85 sh species as
modelled by spatially explicit Bayesian hierarchical species distribution models as a surrogate for biodiversity. ESS are represented
by four layers depicting terrestrial carbon storage and ood regulation supply, and recreation and water use demand, modelled using
the ARticial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services (ARIES) platform
(Villa et al., 2014; Martnez-Lpez et al., 2018). We then use the systematic conservation planning software Marxan with Zones (Ball et
al., 2009; Watts et al., 2009) to spatially allocate the distribution
of biodiversity and ESS into three freshwater conservation management zones dened by Abell et al. (2007): a conservation zone with
a strict emphasis on biodiversity protection, a management zone
allowing for greater use of ESS, and a critical (buffer) zone allowing
for an intermediate use of ESS that simultaneously provides connectivity between conservation zones. We also include a production
zone, dened as a zone where increased water use is allowed, while
not compromising biodiversity conservation (Hermoso et al., 2018).
We further simulate possible multi-national constraints in establishing potential zones for EBM by employing purchasing power parity
(PPP)-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) per capita (i.e., GDP
adjusted for differences in relative spending power between different countries that result from different prices for goods) and the
relative share of each countrys area of the Danube River Basin within
the spatial prioritisation.
This proof-of-concept, as demonstrated for the transboundary
Danube, aims to highlight how multiple model-coupling elements
link to each other. We also discuss further possible extensions
and limitations of the approach towards the larger goal of more
integrated freshwater management that balances biodiversity and
ESS.

2. Material and methods
2.1. Study area
We used the Danube River Basin, draining an area of 807,827 km2
(Habersack et al., 2016) as our study area (Fig. 2). We used subcatchments as conservation planning units in our analyses and
extracted all level 12 sub-catchments of the HydroBASIN dataset
(Lehner and Grill, 2013) draining into the Black Sea, comprising of
7376 sub-catchments with an average size of 108 km2 . All planning
units were treated as spatially explicit entities throughout the analyses, meaning that the as-the-sh-swims connectivity between
planning units was integrated in the analyses. Connectivity was specied as a 500 km up- and downstream distance for each planning
unit, irrespective of dams, yielding a seamless connectivity matrix
across all planning units.

2.2. Biodiversity models
Fish survey data consisted of detection/non-detection information for 85 sh species (Supporting Information Table SI4) derived
from the European Fish Index (EFI+) and the BioFresh project
databases (Zupancic, 2015; Schinegger et al., 2016), sampled from
the years 19552007 for the Danube River Basin. Species data,
including species detections, non-detections, and sampling dates
(i.e., the number of visits per basin) were aggregated to the planning
units using the raster package in R (Hijmans and van Etten, 2018;
R Development Core Team, 2018).
Within each planning unit, we extracted climatic (Hijmans et
al., 2005), topographic (Amatulli et al., 2018), land-cover variables
(Tuanmu and Jetz, 2014, all at 1 km native spatial resolution) and
the number of dams (Lehner et al., 2011) for each sub-catchment,
the latter serving as a proxy for hydrologic alteration. We averaged
these predictors across planning units, with the exception of the
number of dams and precipitation, which we summed across planning units (where the upstream accumulated precipitation along the
stream network mimics runoff; Domisch et al., 2015). We omitted
highly correlated environmental predictors if Pearsons correlation
coecient |r| > 0.7 (Dormann et al., 2013); see Supporting Information Table SI1 for all predictors used). Finally, we centered and scaled

800

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

Fig. 2. (A) Example single-species predictions (top), and the summed probability of all 85 sh species distributions in the Danube River Basin (bottom). Summed probability is for
illustration only and is not used as such in Marxan with Zones. (B) The location of the Danube River Basin (light green) and the Danube main stem (blue) in Europe. The Danube
River Basin outline and main stem shapes were obtained from the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR). (For interpretation of the references
to color in this gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

all eight continuous predictors (i.e., predictors are divided by their
standard deviations and have a mean of zero).
We modelled the potential, probabilistic habitat suitability of
each sh species within the Danube River Basin using a species
distribution model (SDM). In general, a SDM uses species occurrence locations and environmental predictors at those locations
to assess the environmental envelope of the species, which can
then be interpolated using range-wide predictors, yielding a potential habitat suitability map across a study area (Elith and Leathwick, 2009). In this study, we used a hierarchical Bayesian spatially
explicit SDM, modelled using the hSDM package in R (Vieilledent
et al., 2014). This model integrates Bernoulli suitability and Binomial
observability processes into a hierarchical zero-inated binomial
model (Vieilledent et al., 2014). The Bernoulli suitability process
uses species occurrence records and environmental predictors as
the response and explanatory variables. The suitability process is
extended using an intrinsic conditional autoregressive model (iCAR),
which accounts for the spatial autocorrelation of variation in the
occurrence probability of habitat suitability that is not explained
by the environmental variables. Since signicant spatial autocorrelation was detected for 82 of the 85 species, the use of spatial
random effects to account for spatial autocorrelation in the models
was warranted (see Domisch et al., 2016 for a full description).
The observability process uses the number of sampling visits
within each planning unit to estimate the probability of observing a
given species, given the species presence in a planning unit. Here,
we assume that if the species was observed at least once during multiple visits in a planning unit, the habitat is deemed suitable and the
absence of the species during other visits in this planning unit is due
to imperfect detection.
We ran three Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations
with 200,000 iterations each, a burn-in phase of 50,000 iterations

and a thinning interval of 10. Model convergence was assessed by
the multivariate potential scale reduction factor (MPSRF; Brooks and
Gelman, 1998). For the suitability process, we used the coecients
from an initial, non-spatial generalized linear model (GLM) as initial
values, and both suitability and observability processes used uninformed priors centered at zero with a xed large variance of 100
(Domisch et al., 2016). The prior distribution for the variance of the
spatial random effects followed a uniform distribution, i.e., a at
prior where the upper bound of the variance is set to 10. Species data
were split into training (70%) and validation (30%) sets, and model
performance for each species was evaluated using the Area Under
Curve (AUC), True Skill Statistic (TSS), and sensitivity and specicity
(true positive and negative predictions, respectively). Please see the
Supporting Information for details on the entire SDM workow and
species predictions.

2.3. Ecosystem service models
We used the ARticial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services (ARIES)
platform (Villa et al., 2014) to derive ESS estimates in this study
(Fig. 3). ARIES is an open-source technology capable of selecting and
running models to quantify and map all aspects of ESS provision
and use, including their biophysical generation, ow, and extraction by sinks and beneciaries (Villa et al., 2014). In this study, we
modelled four ESS layers: terrestrial carbon storage, ood regulation
supply (both dened as ESS supply layers), recreation activity, and
water use (both dened as ESS demand layers). We follow Hermoso
et al. (2018) and dene terrestrial carbon storage and ood regulation supply (indicative of more natural vegetation in the watershed
and riparian zones) as compatible with protecting freshwater biodiversity, whereas an extensive recreation and water use are dened

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

801

Fig. 3. Four ESS layers used in the model-coupling framework: (A) carbon storage (T/ha), (B) ood regulation supply (relative index), (C) recreational activity (relative index) and
(D) water use (relative index). For more details, please see main text and Martnez-Lpez et al. (2018) in this Special Issue.

as incompatible, having potential detrimental impacts on biodiversity conservation efforts. All ESS model outputs are produced on a
1 km spatial resolution. We briey describe each ESS model below
and refer to Martnez-Lpez et al. (2018) in this Special Issue for a
more detailed description of model structure, assumptions, and data
inputs.
The carbon storage model (Fig. 3A) follows the IPPC Tier 1
methodology developed by Ruesch and Gibbs (2008) and quanties
aboveground and belowground terrestrial carbon storage in vegetation in tons per hectare. The model uses a multi-layer lookup table
with land-cover (including wetlands), ecooristic region, continent,
frontier forests (Potapov et al., 2008), and the occurrence of re
within the last 10 years as inputs (Martnez-Lpez et al., 2018).
The ood regulation model (Fig. 3B) identies areas providing
greater ood regulation as those with higher hazard probability
(based on topographic wetness index (Beven and Kirkby, 1979),
mean annual precipitation, and mean temperature of the wettest
season), and water retention by soils and vegetation, based on the
Curve Number (CN) method (Ferrer-Juli, 2003; Soil Conservation
Service, 1985). In this study, ood regulation supply is represented
as a normalized value between 0 and 1.
The recreation model (Fig. 3C) is inspired by the Ecosystem Services
Mapping Tool (ESTIMAP) model of nature-based outdoor recreation
developed by Paracchini et al. (2014). Recreation supply is an additive
function of naturalness based on land-cover type and the Euclidean
distance to nature-based factors of attractiveness (e.g., distance to protected areas, water bodies, or mountain peaks). Recreation demand
takes into account the likelihood of taking a day trip to a certain
location and the population dening the catchment area of that
location given a global travel-time dataset (Uchida and Nelson, 2009).
This dataset was normalized and discretized into three classes (easily accessible: <=0.25; accessible: 0.25 to 0.5; and not accessible
>0.5). The thresholds of these intervals were calibrated by comparing ESTIMAP results with those from ARIES. The model then estimates
a relative recreation value ranging from 1 to 7, i.e., low to high.
The water-use model is based on the Corine Land-Cover dataset
(EEA, 2012), and uses the expert-derived lookup table from

Burkhard et al. (2012) to reclassify land-cover to derive a water-use
index ranging from 0 (low) to 5 (high). The lookup table reects
that water demand is highest in human-dominated land-cover
types, with the highest values corresponding to urban, industrial,
and commercial areas, as well as for irrigated agriculture, while
more near-natural land-cover types are characterized by generally
lower levels of water demand. Note that opposed to the SDMs, we
do not validate these Tier 1 ESS models (refer to Martnez-Lpez
et al., 2018 for further information).
A small fraction of sub-catchments in Moldavia and Ukraine
had missing ESS data (a total of 314 out of 7376 sub-catchments).
To avoid the potential omission of these sub-catchments, we used
the corresponding ESS information from the surrounding subcatchments to ll the gaps. We rst aggregated each ESS layer
from a 1 km to a coarser 10 km spatial resolution, using the average of 10  10 grids (r.resamp.stats function in GRASS GIS; Neteler
et al., 2012). We then extended these coarse-resolution ESS layers
by a radius of 150 km towards the outer boundary of the Danube
River Basin (where intersecting grids are averaged using the r.grow
function). Finally, we extracted these averaged ESS data for those
sub-catchments that initially had missing data.
2.4. Spatial prioritisation
We used the conservation planning software Marxan with
Zones (Ball et al., 2009; Watts et al., 2009) to spatially prioritise biodiversity and ESS within the Danube River Basin. Marxan solves the
so-called minimum-set problem by selecting a set of planning units
from a larger pool across the study area. Together, the selected planning units build a conservation network within which user-dened
targets for each feature (biodiversity or ESS) are covered for the minimum cost (Gmez et al., 2017). Targets are the amount of each
feature to be covered (e.g., 20% of each species occurrence that needs
to be included in the network solution, or 25% of the total provision
of a given ESS). Costs need to be dened for each planning unit separately. Costs can, for example, be derived from the extent of land
area, resource harvest value, cultural value, or human impact. The

802

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

higher the cost for a planning unit, the less likely the given planning unit will be covered as part of the network. The software also
allows the user to consider and vary the degree of compactness of the
planning unit-network and the importance of meeting each feature
target. Resulting spatial plans identied as best solutions are those
that among all iterations have the lowest objective function value,
which is a combination of the costs, the feature penalty and the connectivity penalty (i.e., a penalty if a feature target or connectivity rule
are not met in the spatial plan; Ball et al., 2009; Watts et al., 2009).
Marxan with Zones, an extension of Marxan, additionally aims to
minimise the overall costs of the zoning plan, while ensuring that
the predened feature targets are met (Watts et al., 2009). Here,
we specied four possible zones sensu Abell et al. (2007), characterized by different objectives and constraints: a focal conservation
zone, a critical management zone serving as a buffer, a catchment management zone that would allow for higher levels of ESS
use that are potentially less compatible with protecting biodiversity (i.e., recreation), and a production zone where ESS considered
incompatible with biodiversity protection are allowed (i.e., water
use). Based on the predicted species and ESS distributions (carbon
storage and ood regulation as supply, and recreation potential and
water use describing demand), we tested various biodiversity and
ESS targets distributed across zones to achieve an overview of possible management plans that spatially balance these input features
under predened targets.
For the species predictions, we transformed the predictive posterior mean probability maps from SDMs into a semi-binary scheme
using TSS as a threshold (Allouche et al., 2006). All values below
the species-specic threshold were converted to zero and values
above the threshold retained their original values. This overcomes
the problem of inating the spatial prioritisation for many planning
units that have low probabilities of occurrence (e.g., 10 planning
units with probabilistic values of 0.1 would equal one planning unit
having a value of 1). Simultaneously, this procedure retained the
information of varying occurrence probabilities (as recommended by
Tulloch et al., 2016) above a certain level of condence as given by
TSS.
We specied the 85 sh species and four ESS types as features for
which we could set targets in the spatial prioritisation, since our aim
was to balance the spatial representation of both biodiversity and
ESS supply and demand (Hermoso et al., 2018). For the species, we
set a feature penalty factor (FPF) of 10 for all species, and an overall
species protection target of 15% (focal conservation zone), 10% (critical management zone), 5% (catchment management zone), and 0%
(production zone, Table 1). This means that, for example, in the focal
conservation zone, 15% of each species modelled distribution should
be covered by this zone. A high FPF of 10 ensures that all species are
forced to meet their targets in the spatial plan.
For each of the four ESS, we set a FPF of 1, and a target of summing
up to 30% across the four zones (Table 1). The low FPF of 1 allowed us
to specify a higher exibility of each ESS to be included (or omitted)
via the target. For instance, extensive recreation nor water use was
allowed to occur in focal conservation zones, and this was achieved

by (i) setting high targets for carbon storage and ood regulation supply (i.e., 15% of the current representation), and (ii) a zero target for
recreation and water use ESS within this zone.
Marxan with Zones used the identical spatial representation and
longitudinal connectivity between planning units as in the species
distribution models (see Supporting Information for details). The
Boundary Length Modier (BLM), a dimensionless parameter that
denes the level of aggregation of planning units (Ardron et al.,
2008), was calibrated to 0.15 (Supporting Information Fig. SI1). Further, we followed Abell et al. (2007) and Hermoso et al. (2018) to
specify rules about which zones would be allowed to be allocated
next to each other (Supporting Information Table SI2). Doing so limited the possibility to place catchment management zones directly
up- or downstream of a focal conservation zone, but enabled the
placement of critical management zones as buffers in between. Likewise, we specied a rule that a focal conservation zone should not be
placed directly up- or downstream of a production zone, or a planning unit that is not prescribed under any of our management zones,
since these areas could be subject to uncertain management.
2.5. Cost factors for the spatial prioritisation
We specied six cost factors to be applied for a planning unit to
be considered in a spatial plan (Fig. 4, Supporting Information Table
SI3). Costs included (i) the area of the planning unit (Fig. 4A), where
larger areas are considered more expensive to be included in a spatial plan (Hermoso et al., 2018), (ii) recreation ESS demand (Fig. 3C),
which, in case of extensive use, can be considered partly incompatible with biodiversity, (iii) anthropogenic water use (Fig. 3D) which
is considered incompatible with protecting freshwater biodiversity,
(iv) a human inuence index (Fig. 4B) depicting the naturalness of a
given planning unit, (v) national GDP per capita, PPP (Fig. 4C), and (vi)
the relative area of each country that falls within the Danube River
Basin (Fig. 4D).
Human inuence (Fig. 4B) is the degree of naturalness, calculated as a reclassication of land-cover types into relative values
ranging from 1 to 7, with higher values representing increasing land
use intensity and human inuence (Martnez-Lpez et al., 2018).
Within Marxan, an area under high human inuence (low naturalness) would receive a high penalty if occurring in focal conservation
zones, while in critical and catchment management zones, human
inuence was allowed to some degree. The rationale behind this
decision is that a planning unit with a high human inuence might
not be suitable for conservation, or at least would be very expensive, because it would require purchase and considerable restoration
if being devoted to conservation.
The GDP and relative national area in the Danube River Basin
(Fig. 4 CD) allows the implementation of our model-coupling framework in a transboundary setting, where countries with limited nancial resources and land area in the Danube River Basin might face
additional challenges in nancing EBM in the basin. As Marxan tries
to minimise the costs in the objective function, it would search for a
less-expensive and alternative spatial conguration of management

Table 1
Targets for all features (biodiversity dened as 85 sh species, and four ecosystem services) per management zone used
in the spatial prioritisation analysis.
Management zone targets [%]
Feature
Biodiversity (85 species)
Carbon storage supply
Flood regulation supply
Recreation demand
Water use demand

Focal conservation

Critical management

Catchment management

Production

15
15
15
0
0

10
10
10
5
0

5
5
5
10
0

0
0
0
15
30

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

803

Fig. 4. Four cost layers used in Marxan with Zones: (A) Sub-catchment (planning unit) size in km2 , (B) human inuence, i.e., an index of naturalness, (C) gross domestic product
(GDP) using purchasing power parity (PPP), (D) the percent area of each country in the Danube River Basin in km2 . ESS demand for recreation and water use were used as costs as
well (see Fig. 3CD). Please see main text for further details.

zones given these additional costs. We rst extracted the average
PPP-adjusted GDP per capita (in 2011 U.S. dollar values) at a 5 degree
resolution for the year 2015 (Kummu et al., 2018) for all countries
within the Danube River Basin (GADM, 2018). The gridded information was preferred over the overall national information as it takes
the possible county-level variability in GDP into account. We then
averaged GDP for each country across those areas that intersect with
the Danube River Basin and transferred the average national GDP to
each planning unit. If a planning unit intersected with several countries, we used the average GDP among these. We then applied an
inverse GDP per planning unit as a cost along with a zone-specic
multiplier: a country with a low GDP is assumed to have (i) limited resources to allocate focal conservation zones, and (ii) and a
high interest in nancially protable production zones (high water
demand). Inverse GDP is needed so that Marxan with Zones applies
a high cost in selecting focal conservation zones in these countries,
hence trying to reduce the likelihood of their inclusion in the spatial plan. We did not intend to override biodiversity conservation in
spatial plans, but to demonstrate how administrative and national
nancial constraints can be at least partially included in the spatial
conservation planning.
The GDP and relative area per country metrics can have a strong
inuence on spatial plans, as country borders might stand out as
zone borders as well. To avoid undermining the inuence of longitudinal connectivity, we balanced the weights for GDP and relative
area with those for BLM. This yielded a stronger relative inuence
of longitudinal connectivity on the spatial allocation of zones, while
still accounting for macro-scale patterns of GDP and relative area
within the Danube River Basin. All costs were scaled from 1 to 100
to enable their direct comparison and to facilitate calibration of cost
parameters.
We acknowledge that we met these simplied assumptions
for illustrating the model-coupling approach using a blank-slate
example with a high level of exibility to simulate different settings

in the spatial prioritisation. For simplicity, we refrained from locking
in any current, already established protected areas in the spatial plan.
The inclusion of established protected areas decreases this exibility. Additionally, current protected areas have not necessarily been
optimised considering the 85 sh species we use as targets. They
have generally rarely considered freshwater biodiversity, but have
been established regarding multiple (terrestrial) species groups, biodiversity indices such as species richness, or land-cover types as
surrogates, in combination with nancial constraints (Ardron et al.,
2008). An overview of the water-related protected areas of the
Danube River Basin is provided in the river basin management
plan (ICPDR, 2009b). We also assumed equal production intensities
and management expenses for maintaining different zones across
countries.

2.6. Spatial prioritisation using Marxan with Zones
We ran two spatial prioritisation analyses with the above settings
(see Table 1 for a description of the targets). We kept the targets for
all features xed (summing to 30% across zones). First, we applied
the following costs: sub-catchment area, human inuence, recreation, and water use (see Supporting Information Table SI3). We then
compared the results of this basic analysis with a new spatial prioritisation, in which we additionally employed national-level costs
via GDP and the relative share in area per country in the Danube
River Basin (referred to as GDP-area analysis). We aimed to show
how EBM plans across the Danube River Basin could change if we
assume an equal share of costs among all the involved countries compared to a multi-national EBM plan given potential national-scale
nancial constraints. This would also include the assumption that
countries with a lower percentage of their area in the basin would
devote less to EBM planning than those countries that largely fall
within the basin. For both analyses, we ran 100 repetitions with

804

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

1,000,000 iterations each. We report the total area per zone, the
average SD of the GDP and area-within-basin within each zone.
3. Results
3.1. Biodiversity and ESS models
Model validation of SDMs yielded high evaluation scores
across all 85 species (Supporting Information Table SI4), with
AUC = 0.892  0.081 (average SD, sensitivity = 89  11.39, specicity = 82.73  10.91, TSS = 0.722  0.152, and a detection probability of 0.33  0.24). Fig. 2 shows example maps of single-species
predictions, and stacked occurrence probabilities to illustrate the
estimated richness pattern of those 85 sh species. The stacked
occurrence probability (as a proxy for richness; Mateo et al., 2012)
increased from the Upper towards the Lower Danube, including the
tributaries Drava, Sava, and Tisa, and further towards the Danube
Delta (Fig. 2).
Regarding the ESS models, greater areas of carbon storage are
evident in forested areas of the Carpathian Mountains, the Dinaric
Alps, and the Alps that form the western headwaters of the Danube
River (Fig. 3A). Similarly, areas of greater ood regulation are evident
on these and other areas with greater natural land-cover (Fig. 3B).
Recreational activity (Fig. 3C) follows a gradient from the Upper
to the Lower Danube, with high recreational activity areas in the
Carpathian Mountains and the Danube Delta area. High water-use
areas coincide with the location of urban, industrial, commercial, and
irrigated agriculture areas (Fig. 3D).
3.2. Spatial prioritisation
The best solutions among the 100 repetitions for both basic and
GDP-area runs showed that all feature targets were achieved for
biodiversity and ESS (Fig. 5 AB). In reaching the best solution in
the basic analysis, the total area allocated to catchment management
(283,520 km2 ) was double that of focal conservation (136,888 km2 ),
while requiring 222,437 km2 for fullling the production zone target (Fig. 6A). In the GDP-area analysis, fullling the targets required
120,407 km2 to be considered as a focal conservation zone, with
296,189 km2 allocated to production zones. Out of 807,827 km2 ,
30,111 km2 were not allocated to any management zone.
Predening costs and weights for GDP and percent area within
the Danube River Basin (Supporting Information Table SI3) led to a
different spatial representation of the four management zones in the
best solutions (Fig. 5 AB). These effects were also mirrored in the
average GDP per zone (Fig. 6B) and the percent area of each country
of the Danube River Basin (Fig. 6C). Compared to the basic analysis,
the best solution derived from the GDP-area analysis (i) left a fraction
of planning units outside the designated management zones, (ii) and
planning units of the focal conservation, critical management, and
catchment management zones would be located in countries with a
higher GDP, as well as in countries that have a higher percentage of
their area within the Danube River Basin (Fig. 6 BC).
4. Discussion
Ecosystem-based management (EBM) is considered to derive
effective and sustainable management options for freshwater biodiversity, while concurrently considering the needs of biodiversity
and human society (Long et al., 2015; Langhans et al., in press). We
followed the work of Abell et al. (2007) and Hermoso et al. (2018),
and integrated the spatial planning framework into the conceptual
framework proposed by Langhans et al. (in press). We demonstrate
this framework by applying the ultralight workow (Fig. 1) within
the transboundary Danube River Basin. The model-coupling process consists of rst quantifying the current spatial representation

of biodiversity and ESS, followed by setting management targets
for distinct management zones. We then used a spatial prioritisation to allocate management zones across the sub-catchments (i.e.,
planning units) within the Danube River Basin, fullling biodiversity and ESS targets, while minimising the costs associated with
the spatial plan. By specifying the spatial dependencies between
planning units, we accounted for longitudinal connectivity within
management zones, including buffer zones between conservation
management and production zones.
The basic and GDP-area analyses led to clear differences in the
spatial conguration of management zones. Interestingly, a reasonable target of 1/3 of each feature could be reached even with
(simulated) national constraining costs, i.e., where high-GDP and
high-percent area countries are assumed to devote more resources
towards conservation than their counterparts.
In the GDP-area analysis, we gave an a priori priority to focal
conservation zones and critical management zones to be allocated
within high-GDP countries, and countries that cover a larger fraction of the river basin (expressed using the costs). This evoked
a change in zone allocation, e.g., in the Upper Danube, where
production- and catchment management-dominated zones in the
basic analysis were replaced by focal conservation, critical and
catchment management zones in the GDP-area analysis (Fig. 5 A
B). Given the concept of irreplaceability, this means that these areas
contain predictions of those sh species that are not unique in the
Upper Danube, and could be covered by selecting planning units in
other areas where the GDP-area costs are lower than in the Upper
Danube. Likewise, the compatible ESS features (carbon storage and
ood regulation supply) were represented in other areas of the
Danube River Basin as well. In contrast, the Lower Danube and the
Danube Delta stood out as being irreplaceable in terms of biodiversity, as this area was specied as a focal conservation zone in
both analyses. This area, hence, contains planning units in which a
unique combination of sh occurrences were predicted, and which
could only be covered by the high target provided by focal conservation zones, given the low costs in this area (Fig. 4). Although
a high recreational activity index was predicted to occur in the
Danube Delta (Fig. 3C), coinciding with the designated focal conservation zones, this ESS was also represented, e.g., in the Carpathian
Mountains such that the recreation activity targets were fullled
by Marxan by selecting other planning units.
In the GDP-area analysis, a fraction of the Danube River Basin
was left outside the designated management zones. This indicates that the feature targets were met given a different spatial conguration where this fraction was not required. In other
words, the GDP-area costs outweighed the cost regarding the
area of the planning units, recreation, water use and the human
inuence index, and indicates how the spatial conguration of
management zones can be modied to reach the preferred spatial
distribution of zones.
The practical implementation of the ultralight workow laid
out by Langhans et al. (in press) shows on the one hand the feasibility
of the approach, while on the other hand, the challenges associated
with it. The exibility is underlined by the spatial prioritisation that
cost effectively allows testing various biodiversity and ESS management options in a spatially explicit context (Hermoso et al., 2018).
The framework by Langhans et al. (in press) further enables the integration of additional aspects; given its exibility, we also touch on
the light workow by highlighting how the cornerstones of EBM,
namely effectiveness, eciency, and social equity can be taken into
account in the spatial plans (Langhans et al., in press). Here, effectiveness of a given spatial plan is directly assessed by comparing how
well the feature targets are met. Eciency, as specied using spatial layers depicting costs (Fig. 4), is adjusted for each management
zone. Social equity was specied indirectly in Marxan via the costs
to achieve the desired outcome, to account for countries differential

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

805

Fig. 5. Spatial prioritisation of biodiversity and ecosystem services (ESS) in the Danube River Basin considering (A) biodiversity and ESS along with the costs of sub-catchment
size, human inuence, recreation and water demand (basic analysis), and (B) adding the costs of gross domestic product (GDP) per capita (purchasing power parity, PPP) and the
portion of each country within the Danube River Basin (GDP-area analysis).

ability to provide the nancial resources for EBM. Here, we specied
multiple cost factors, including socioeconomic data (Ban and Klein,
2009). We compared the spatial plan derived from an assumption
where each country contributes equally to the EBM to one where the
PPP-adjusted GDP and the percent area of each country in the basin
were used as additional costs.
Considering our two analyses as a demonstration of the ultralight
workow, we acknowledge the hypothetical nature of our study
that illustrates the challenges of the approach. Varying targets and
costs regarding effectiveness and eciency are required to yield the
optimal spatial representation of management zones in the Danube,
along with the spatial conguration of the current protected areas.
Moreover, given projected climate and land use impacts on the
environment, future potential changes in biodiversity and ESS should
be considered in future work (Langhans et al., in press). While the
workow could be further extended as described in Langhans et
al. (in press) by ranking management strategies, this would require

external data-driven biodiversity and ESS scenarios to assess possible
future EBM management changes.
The light and full frameworks involve additional aspects
for effectively pursuing EBM that are not covered in our example
(Langhans et al., in press): (i) modelling biodiversity and ESS across
realms (e.g., terrestrial, freshwater, and marine zones), ensuring connectivity and hence accounting for cross-realm dependencies, and
(ii) working closely with stakeholders to account for potential scenarios in a given region (e.g., climate or land-use change), as well
as to set management strategies. In a real-world situation, targets would additionally (iii) need to take environmental legislation,
international agreements, and other policy recommendations into
account. Finally, data and model-driven uncertainties should be carefully assessed and communicated throughout the application of the
workow (Hamel and Bryant, 2017).
To inform decision making geared towards successful application of EBM in a way that builds consensus among all countries

806

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807

to optimum. For instance, while the targets are met, it is crucial that
the spatial allocation of the different zones meets expectations and is
sensible from both ecological and conservation perspectives (e.g., a
focal conservation zone should be located upstream of a catchments
management zone, as described by Abell et al., 2007). These connectivity penalty parameter values are specic to each study area and
need to be calibrated for each study area again. While this may seem
arbitrary, the aim is to yield an output that satises multiple relevant
criteria (i.e., ecology, management, stakeholder preferences, see also
Hermoso et al., 2018).
4.1. Conclusions
This quantitative model-coupling framework for EBM (Langhans
et al., in press), here demonstrated for the Danube River Basin, shows
how biodiversity and ESS estimates can be jointly simulated in any
area of interest, given the requisite data and models. Based on this
generic model-coupling workow, EBM provides an iterative process that can be incorporated, including stakeholder involvement
and ultimately scenario development. Within a exible framework,
such simulations can be vital to communicate biodiversity and ESS
targets regarding effectiveness, eciency, and social equity, especially in transboundary regions such as the Danube River Basin. In a
wider context, by following a consistent theoretical framework, the
model-coupling approach is applicable to virtually any region given
the basic requirements of species point occurrences and freely available, global environmental predictors for the SDMs and ESS models
that can be calculated in ARIES (Villa et al., 2014; Martnez-Lpez et
al., 2018).
Acknowledgments

Fig. 6. Barplots representing the best solutions of the two analyses, i.e. using the basic
(green) and gross domestic product (GDP)-area analysis (blue): (A) the total area for
each zone, (B) the average SD GDP per zone, and (C) the average SD country share
within the Danube River Basin per zone. The best solution derived from the basic analysis yielded no planning units outside the management zones. (For interpretation of
the references to color in this gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of this article.)

We thank the EFI+ and BioFresh consortia for the sh data. This
study was funded by the European Unions Horizon 2020 - Research
and Innovation Framework Programme under grant agreement No.
642317, granting funding to SD, SCJ, KK, SDL, JML, SB, FV, AF, TH, and
FB. SDL has received additional funding from the European Unions
Horizon 2020 - Research and Innovation Framework Programme
under the Marie Skodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 748625, and
SCJ from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) for the GLANCE project (Global Change Effects in River
Ecosystems; 01 LN1320A). VH is funded by a Ramon y Cajal contract (RYC-2013-13979) supported by the Spanish Government. The
U.S. Geological Survey Land Change Science Program under the Land
Resources Mission Area supported KJBs contributions to this paper.
We thank Van Bustic for constructive comments on an earlier draft
of this manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary data

and stakeholders, while accounting for social equity (Hein et al.,
2018), requires that all stakeholders are involved in the spatial planning process during all steps. Further, stakeholder agreement on
the biodiversity and ESS data and models, management zone definitions, targets and costs is required. Under these conditions, this
model-coupling framework can be used to inform EBM-based decision making. For transnational water bodies, international resource
management entities such as the International Commission for the
Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR, 2009a) would provide a
platform to foster such discussions and facilitate agreements.
While the species distribution models and ecosystem service
models use hard data for creating their outputs, the spatial prioritisation (i) relies on modelled outputs from SDM and ESS models,
and (ii) can be considered subjective regarding its parameters (as
also in the spatial planning literature). Spatial planning requires the
accommodation of multiple assumptions to yield a solution closest

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.348.

References
Abell, R., Allan, J.D., Lehner, B., 2007. Unlocking the potential of protected areas for
freshwaters. Biol. Conserv. 134, 4863.
Allouche, O., Tsoar, A., Kadmon, R., 2006. Assessing the accuracy of species distribution
models: prevalence, kappa and the true skill statistic (TSS). J. Appl. Ecol. 43 (6),
12231232.
Amatulli, G., Domisch, S., Tuanmu, M.-N., Parmentier, B., Ranipeta, A., Malczyk, J., Jetz,
W., 2018. A suite of global, cross-scale topographic variables for environmental
and biodiversity modeling. Sci. Data 5, 180040.
Ardron, J.A., Possingham, H.P., Klein, C.J., 2008. Marxan Good Practices Handbook.
Pacic Marine Analysis and Research Association, Vancouver.
Aylward, B., Bandyopadhyay, J., Belausteguigotia, J.C., Borkey, P., Cassar, A., Meadors, L.,
Saade, L., Siebentritt, M., Stein, R., Tognetti, S., et al. 2005. Freshwater ecosystem
services. Ecosystems and human well-being: policy responses 3, 213256.

S. Domisch, K. Kakouei, J. Martnez-Lpez, et al. / Science of the Total Environment 656 (2019) 797807
Ball, I.R., Possingham, H.P., Watts, M., 2009. Marxan and Relatives: Software for
Spatial Conservation Prioritisation. Spatial Conservation Prioritisation: Quantitative Methods and Computational Tools, Oxford University Press, Oxford., pp.
185195.
Ban, N.C., Klein, C.J., 2009. Spatial socioeconomic data as a cost in systematic marine
conservation planning. Conserv. Lett. 2, 206215.
Beven, K.J., Kirkby, M.J., 1979. A physically based, variable contributing area model
of basin hydrology/un modle  base physique de zone dappel variable de
lhydrologie du bassin versant. Hydrol. Sci. J. 24, 4369.
Botsford, L.W., Castilla, J.C., Peterson, C.H., 1997. The management of sheries and
marine ecosystems. Science 277, 509515.
Brooks, S.P., Gelman, A., 1998. General methods for monitoring convergence of iterative simulations. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 7, 434455.
Burkhard, B., Kroll, F., Nedkov, S., Mller, F., 2012. Mapping ecosystem service supply,
demand and budgets. Ecol. Ind. 21, 1729.
Caldwell, L.K., 1970. The ecosystem as a criterion for public land policy. Nat. Resour. J.
10, 203.
Domisch, S., Amatulli, G., Jetz, W., 2015. Near-global freshwater-specic environmental variables for biodiversity analyses in 1 km resolution. Sci. Data 2, 150073.
Domisch, S., Wilson, A.M., Jetz, W., 2016. Model-based integration of observed and
expert-based information for assessing the geographic and environmental distribution of freshwater species. Ecography 39, 10781088.
Dormann, C.F., Elith, J., Bacher, S., Buchmann, C., Carl, G., Carr, G., Marquz, J.R.G.,
Gruber, B., Lafourcade, B., Leito, P.J., et al. 2013. Collinearity: a review of methods
to deal with it and a simulation study evaluating their performance. Ecography
36, 2746.
Dudgeon, D., Arthington, A.H., Gessner, M.O., Kawabata, Z.-I., Knowler, D.J., Lvque, C.,
Naiman, R.J., Prieur-Richard, A.H., Soto, D., Stiassny, M.L., et al. 2006. Freshwater
biodiversity: importance, threats, status and conservation challenges. Biol. Rev.
81, 163182.
EEA, 1999. Environmental indicators: typology and overview. Technical report No 25.
European Environment Agency, Copenhagen.
EEA, 2012. Corine Land Cover. European Environment Agency, Copenhagen.
Elith, J., Leathwick, J.R., 2009. Species distribution models: ecological explanation and
prediction across space and time. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 40, 677697. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.110308.120159.
Falkenmark, M., 2003. Freshwater as shared between society and ecosystems:
from divided approaches to integrated challenges. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 358,
20372049.
Ferrer-Juli, M., 2003. Anlisis de nuevas fuentes de datos para la estimacin del
parmetro nmero de curva: perles de suelos y teledeteccin. Tech. rep. Madrid.
GADM, 2018. GADM database of global administrative areas, version 3.6. [accessed
20180608] http://www.gadm.org.
Gmez, C.M., Delacmara, G., Jhnig, S.C., Langhans, S.D., Domisch, S., Hermoso, V., Piet,
G., Martnez-Lpez, J., Lago, M., Boteler, B., Rouillard, J., Abhold, K., Reichert, P.,
Schuwirth, N., Hein, T., Pletterbauer, F., Funk, A., Nogueira, Lilleb, A.I., Daam, M.,
Teixeira, H., Robinson, L., Culhane, F., Schlter, M., Martin, R., Iglesias-Campos, A.,
Barbosa, A.L., Arvalo-Torres, J., OHiggins, T., 2017. Developing the AQUACROSS
assessment framework. Deliverable 3.2, AQUACROSS, European Unions Horizon
2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Grant Agreement No.
642317.
Habersack, H., Hein, T., Stanica, A., Liska, I., Mair, R., Jger, E., Hauer, C., Bradley, C.,
2016. Challenges of river basin management: current status of, and prospects for,
the River Danube from a river engineering perspective. Sci. Total Environ. 543,
828845.
Hamel, P., Bryant, B.P., 2017. Uncertainty assessment in ecosystem services analyses:
seven challenges and practical responses. Ecosyst. Serv. 24, 115.
Hein, T., Funk, A., Pletterbauer, F., Graf, W., Zsuffa, I., Haidvogl, G., Schinegger, R.,
Weigelhofer, G., 2018. Management challenges related to long-term ecological
impacts, complex stressor interactions, and different assessment approaches in
the Danube River Basin. River Res. Appl. 0, 110.
Hermoso, V., Cattarino, L., Linke, S., Kennard, M.J., 2018. Catchment zoning to enhance
co-benets and minimize trade-offs between ecosystem services and freshwater
biodiversity conservation. Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst. 28, 10041014.
Hermoso, V., Filipe, A.F., Segurado, P., Beja, P., 2016. Catchment zoning to unlock freshwater conservation opportunities in the Iberian Peninsula. Divers. Distrib. 22,
960969.
Hijmans, R.J., Cameron, S.E., Parra, J.L., Jones, P.G., Jarvis, A., 2005. Very high resolution interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. Int. J. Climatol. 25,
19651978.
Hijmans, R.J., van Etten, J., 2018. raster: Geographic Data Analysis and Modeling. R
package version, 2.
ICPDR, 2009a. The Danube River Basin District Management Plan. ICPDR-International
Commission for the Protection of the Danube River. available at http://www.
icpdr.org/owpaper/viewer/default/les/DRBM_Plan_2009.pdf.
ICPDR, 2009b. Water-related Protected Areas (>500 ha). ICPDR-International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River. available at http://www.icpdr.
org/main/les/drbmp2015-map18-pas.pdf.
Knights, A.M., Koss, R.S., Robinson, L.A., 2013. Identifying common pressure pathways from a complex network of human activities to support ecosystem-based
management. Ecol. Appl. 23, 755765.
Kummu, M., Taka, M., Guillaume, J.H., 2018. Gridded global datasets for gross
domestic product and Human Development Index over 19902015. Sci. Data
5, 180004.

View publication stats

807

Langhans, S., Domisch, S., Balbi, S., Delacmara, G., Hermoso, V., Kuemmerlen, M.,
Martin, R., Martnez-Lpez, J., Vermeiren, P., Villa, F., Jhnig, S., 2018. Combining
eight research areas to foster the uptake of ecosystem-based management in
fresh waters. Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshwat. Ecosyst. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aqc.3012. (in press).
Lehner, B., Grill, G., 2013. Global river hydrography and network routing: baseline
data and new approaches to study the worlds large river systems. Hydrol.
Process. 27, 21712186.
Lehner, B., Liermann, C.R., Revenga, C., Vrsmarty, C., Fekete, B., Crouzet, P., Dll, P.,
Endejan, M., Frenken, K., Magome, J., Nilsson, C., Robertson, J.C., Rdel, R., Sindorf,
N., Wisser, D., 2011. High-resolution mapping of the worlds reservoirs and
dams for sustainable river-ow management. Front. Ecol. Environ. 9, 494502.
Leslie, H.M., McLeod, K.L., 2007. Confronting the challenges of implementing marine
ecosystem-based management. Front. Ecol. Environ. 5, 540548.
Loh, J., Green, R.E., Ricketts, T., Lamoreux, J., Jenkins, M., Kapos, V., Randers, J., 2005.
The Living Planet index: using species population time series to track trends
in biodiversity. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 360, 289295.
Long, R.D., Charles, A., Stephenson, R.L., 2015. Key principles of marine ecosystem-based management. Mar. Policy 57, 5360.
Mace, G.M., Norris, K., Fitter, A.H., 2012. Biodiversity and ecosystem services: a
multilayered relationship. Trends Ecol. Evol. 27, 1926.
Maes, J., Egoh, B., Willemen, L., Liquete, C., Vihervaara, P., Schgner, J.P., Grizzetti, B.,
Drakou, E.G., La Notte, A., Zulian, G., et al. 2012. Mapping ecosystem services
for policy support and decision making in the European Union. Ecosyst. Serv.
1, 3139.
Margules, C.R., Pressey, R.L., 2000. Systematic conservation planning. Nature 405,
243253.
Martnez-Fernndez, J., Esteve-Selma, M.-A., Martnez-Paz, J.-M., Carreo, M.-F.,
Martnez-Lpez, J., Robledano, F., Farins, P., 2014. Trade-offs between biodiversity conservation and nutrients removal in wetlands of arid intensive
agricultural basins. Ecological modelling and engineering of lakes and wetlands.
Developments in environmental modelling vol. 26. pp. 275310.
Martnez-Lpez, J., Bagstad, K., Balbi, S., Magrach, A., Athanasiadis, I., Pascual, M.,
Voigt, B., Willcock, S., Villa, F., 2018. Towards Globally Customizable Ecosystem
Service Models. Sci. Total Environ. 650, 23252336.
Mateo, R.G., Felicsimo, .M., Pottier, J., Guisan, A., Muoz, J., 2012. Do stacked species
distribution models reect altitudinal diversity patterns? PLoS One 7, e32586.
Neteler, M., Bowman, M.H., Landa, M., Metz, M., 2012. GRASS GIS: a multi-purpose
open source GIS. Environ. Model. Softw. 31, 124130.
Paracchini, M.L., Zulian, G., Kopperoinen, L., Maes, J., Schgner, J.P., Termansen, M.,
Zandersen, M., Perez-Soba, M., Scholeeld, P.A., Bidoglio, G., 2014. Mapping
cultural ecosystem services: a framework to assess the potential for outdoor
recreation across the EU. Ecol. Indic. 45, 371385.
Potapov, P., Yaroshenko, A., Turubanova, S., Dubinin, M., Laestadius, L., Thies, C.,
Aksenov, D., Egorov, A., Yesipova, Y., Glushkov, I., et al. 2008. Mapping the
worlds intact forest landscapes by remote sensing. Ecol. Soc. 13,
R Development Core Team, 2018. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Ricciardi, A., Rasmussen, J.B., 1999. Extinction rates of North American freshwater
fauna. Conserv. Biol. 13, 12201222.
Ruesch, A., Gibbs, H.K., 2008. New IPCC Tier-1 Global Biomass Carbon Map for the
Year 2000.
Schinegger, R., Pletterbauer, F., Melcher, A., Schmutz, S., 2016. Metadata describing
the European sh index plus (e+) database. Freshw. Metadata J. 17, 112.
Slocombe, D.S., 1993. Implementing ecosystem-based management. BioScience 43,
612622.
Soil Conservation Service, 1985. National Engineering Handbook: Section 4:
Hydrology. Washington, DC.
Sommerwerk, N., Bloesch, J., Paunovic, M., Baumgartner, C., Venohr, M., SchneiderJacoby, M., Hein, T., Tockner, K., 2010. Managing the worlds most international
river: the Danube River Basin. Mar. Freshw. Res. 61, 736748.
Tuanmu, M.N., Jetz, W., 2014. A global 1-km consensus land-cover product for
biodiversity and ecosystem modelling. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 23, 10311045.
Tulloch, A.I., Sutcliffe, P., Naujokaitis-Lewis, I., Tingley, R., Brotons, L., Ferraz, K.M.P.,
Possingham, H., Guisan, A., Rhodes, J.R., 2016. Conservation planners tend to
ignore improved accuracy of modelled species distributions to focus on multiple
threats and ecological processes. Biol. Cons. 199, 157171.
Uchida, H., Nelson, A., 2009. Agglomeration Index: Towards a New Measure of Urban
Concentration.
Vieilledent, G., Latimer, A., Gelfand, A., Merow, C., Wilson, A., Mortier, F., Silander, J.,
Jr, 2014. hSDM: Hierarchical Bayesian Species Distribution Models.R package
version, 1.
Villa, F., Bagstad, K.J., Voigt, B., Johnson, G.W., Portela, R., Honzk, M., Batker, D.,
2014. A methodology for adaptable and robust ecosystem services assessment.
PLoS ONE 9, e91001.
Watts, M.E., Ball, I.R., Stewart, R.S., Klein, C.J., Wilson, K., Steinback, C., Lourival,
R., Kircher, L., Possingham, H.P., 2009. Marxan with zones: software for optimal conservation based land-and sea-use zoning. Environ. Model. Softw. 24,
15131521.
Zupancic, P., 2015. Biofresh (data publisher) and Primoz Zupancic (data provider).
Distribution Data of Western Balkan Freshwater Fish Mobilised through BioFresh.
published on http://data.freshwaterbiodiversity.eu.

