Translation of Remote Sensing data into Sustainable Development Indicators
(TRISDI)
Lead Supervisor: Stephen Morse, University of Surrey, Centre for Environment and Sustainability (CES)
Email: s.morse@surrey.ac.uk
Co-supervisors: Richard Murphy (University of Surrey), John Fonweban (UN Food and Agriculture
Organisation, Ghana), Emma Woolliams (National Physical Laboratory), Jim Lynch (University of
Surrey)
Earth Observation (EO) is an important means by which changes can be observed on the Earth's surface. EO is
an exciting technology of the 21st century and as satellite build and launch costs fall and other EO vehicles are
available (drones, aircraft LIDAR etc) an increasing diversity of developed and developing countries have access
and ownership of these rapidly advancing technologies. For example, Nigeria has launched three observation
satellites - Nigeria Sat-1, Nigeria Sat-2 and Nigeria Sat-X - having a high-resolution (2m/pixel) imaging
capability and intended application in a variety of tasks such as planning and monitoring of resource use. The
National Space Research and Development Agency (NSRDA) of Nigeria is responsible for these satellites.
However, anecdotal evidence suggests that the application of EO information in shaping and monitoring policy
and management practices in Nigeria is far short of its potential. Surprisingly, there have not been any systematic
analyses of the utility of EO data by government departments, agencies or research in Africa, although a current
SCENARIO PhD student is currently exploring this topic in Brazil.
An obvious linkage between EO data and application lies in the calibration of indicators and indices (where an
index is a collection of indicators). This has considerable potential in, for example, delivery and measurement
and evaluation (M&E) of progress towards the UNs 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A specific field
with much relevance to sustainable development is the REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Forest Degradation) programme of the UN; designed to ensure that forests are protected and continue to support
the livelihoods of people who depend upon them. Nigeria is a signatory to REDD+ and has (since 2012) selected
Cross River State in the south-east of the country as a test-bed. The team also has access to test sites connected
with ongoing Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) sponsored research on food security in Nigeria and
these provide the proposed project with areas where agricultural land use is changing in repose to diverse social
and developmental pressures of great relevance to the SDGs.
The aim of the project would be to critically analyse the potential for applying EO data to
populate SDG indicators and links to policy, management and M&E.

REDD+ policy generation
Monitoring
Management

RS Data

REDD+ Indicators

REDD+ Index =  (REDD+ Indicators)

Model for translation of Earth Observation data into a set of REDD+ Indicators and index

Training opportunities:
The student would be based at the University of Surrey and take part in the training available at the university.
She/he would also be able to attend modules in CES and other departments, including the Surrey Space Centre.
As an NPL-sponsored CASE student she/he would also be part of NPLs Post Graduate Research Institute, which
provides links between students at NPL. The student will learn a variety of skills in processing EO data, GIS,
landscape ecology, indicator development, forest management, institutional dynamics and policy
development/implementation. Of especial relevance in terms of skills development would be the communication
of complex scientific data into forms that non-specialists can use to help make informed decisions. The student
would gain fieldwork experience in Nigeria (Cross River State and the Federal Capital Territory).
Student profile:
This project would be suitable for students with an undergraduate and postgraduate degree in geography,
environmental science/management, agricultural science, ecology or conservation with a strong interest in Earth
Observation, indicator/index development and the social sciences. Experience of natural resource management,
forestry, Earth Observation and/or agriculture/food security in Africa would certainly provide an advantage.
Funding particulars:
This project has CASE co-sponsorship provided by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL).

http://www.reading.ac.uk/nercdtp

