Rapid urbanization has resulted in a growing number of slum dwellers, inadequate and overburdened infrastructure and services and worsening air pollution. The pandemic will hit the hardest the more than 1 billion slum dwellers worldwide, who suffer from a lack of adequate housing, no running water at home, shared toilets, few or no waste management systems, overcrowded public transport and limited access to formal health-care facilities. Many in that population work in the informal sector and are at high risk of losing their livelihood as cities shut down. Urgent response plans are needed to prepare for and respond to outbreaks in informal settlements and slums.

The number of slum dwellers reached more than 1 billion in 2018, which represents 24 per cent of the urban population, up slightly from 23 per cent in 2014. The number of people living in urban slums is highest in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia (370 million), sub-Saharan Africa (238 million) and Central and Southern Asia (226 million).

Access to adequate, reliable and safe public transport is a basic urban need. As shown in data collected in 2019 from a sample of 610 cities in 95 countries, only half of the world’s urban population had convenient access to public transport, defined as living within 500 metres’ walking distance from a low-capacity transport system (such as a bus stop) and within 1,000 metres of a high-capacity transport system (such as a railway or a ferry terminal).

Data collected in 2019 from a sample of 755 cities in 95 countries show that, in the period 1990–2015, most urban areas recorded a general increase in the extent of built-up area (defined as the presence of buildings) per person. On average, all regions except sub-Saharan Africa and Eastern and South-Eastern Asia recorded a consistent increase in the built-up area per capita, with Australia and New Zealand recording the highest values.

Based on 2019 data from 610 cities in 95 countries, the share of land allocated to streets and open spaces, which is critical to cities’ productivity and the social and health dimensions of their populations, averaged only about 16 per cent globally. Of those, streets accounted for about three times as much urban land as open public spaces, such as parks and riverfronts. The share of the population that could obtain access to open public spaces within 400 metres’ walking distance along a street network averaged 46.7 per cent.