vaccines for all. By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination. Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate. Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and noncommunicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to medicines for all. Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of the health workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed countries and small island developing States. Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks. Spending $1 billion in immunization coverage can save 1 million childrens lives each year. GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING: WHY IT MATTERS. Whats the goal here? To ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages. Why? Ensuring healthy lives and promoting wellbeing for all at all ages is important to building prosperous societies. Major progress has been made in improving the health of millions of people. Maternal and child mortality rates have been reduced, life expectancy continues to increase globally, and the fight against some infectious diseases has made steady progress. However, in the case of other diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis, progress has slowed or stalled. At least half the worlds population are still without access to essential health services. In rich and poor countries alike, a health emergency can push people into bankruptcy or poverty. Concerted efforts are required to achieve universal health coverage and sustainable financing for health; address the growing burden of non-communicable diseases, tackle antimicrobial resistance and environmental factors contributing to ill health. What progress have we made so far? Major progress has been made in several areas, including in child and maternal health as well as in addressing HIV/AIDS. Despite this progress, maternal mortality continues to affect women in low- and middle-income countries disproportionately. The total number of deaths of children under 5 years of age dropped from 9.8 million in 2000 to 5.4