of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births. Under-five mortality rate. Neonatal mortality rate. By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases. Number of new HIV infections per 1,000 uninfected population, by sex, age and key populations. Tuberculosis incidence per 1,000 population. Malaria incidence per 1,000 population. Hepatitis B incidence per 100,000 population. Number of people requiring interventions against neglected tropical diseases. By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being. Mortality rate attributed to cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes or chronic respiratory disease. Suicide mortality rate. Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol. Coverage of treatment interventions (pharmacological, psychosocial and rehabilitation and aftercare services) for substance use disorders. Harmful use of alcohol, defined according to the national context as alcohol per capita consumption (aged 15 years and older) within a calendar year in litres of pure alcohol. By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents. Death rate due to road traffic injuries. By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes. Proportion of women of reproductive age (aged 15-49 years) who have their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods. Adolescent birth rate (aged 10-14 years; aged 15-19 years) per 1,000 women in that age group. Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all. Coverage of essential health services (defined as the average coverage of essential services based on tracer interventions that include reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health, infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases and service capacity and access, among the general and the most disadvantaged population). Proportion of population with large household expenditures on health as a share of total household expenditure or income. By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination. Mortality rate attributed to household and ambient air pollution. Mortality rate attributed