support for implementing effective and targeted capacity-building in developing countries to support national plans to implement all the sustainable development goals, including through North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation. Dollar value of financial and technical assistance (including through North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation) committed to developing countries. Promote a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system under the World Trade Organization, including through the conclusion of negotiations under its Doha Development Agenda. Worldwide weighted tariff-average. Significantly increase the exports of developing countries, in particular with a view to doubling the least developed countries share of global exports by 2020. Developing countries and least developed countries share of global exports. Realize timely implementation of duty-free and quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries, consistent with World Trade Organization decisions, including by ensuring that preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from least developed countries are transparent and simple, and contribute to facilitating market access. Average tariffs faced by developing countries, least developed countries and small island developing States. Enhance global macroeconomic stability, including through policy coordination and policy coherence. Macroeconomic Dashboard. Enhance policy coherence for sustainable development. Number of countries with mechanisms in place to enhance policy coherence of sustainable development. Respect each countrys policy space and leadership to establish and implement policies for poverty eradication and sustainable development. Extent of use of country-owned results frameworks and planning tools by providers of development cooperation. Enhance the global partnership for sustainable development, complemented by multi-stakeholder partnerships that mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, to support the achievement of the sustainable development goals in all countries, in particular developing countries. Number of countries reporting progress in multi-stakeholder development effectiveness monitoring frameworks that support the achievement of the sustainable development goals. Encourage and promote effective public, public-private and civil society partnerships, building on the experience and resourcing strategies