View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk

brought to you by

CORE

provided by Universit del Salento: ESE - Salento University Publishing

Community Psychology in Global Perspective
CPGP, Comm. Psych. Glob. Persp. Vol 4, Issue 1, 20  41

GLOBALIZATION, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, SOCIAL
NETWORKS AND POLITICAL POLARIZATION: NEW CHALLENGES
FOR COMMUNITY PSYCHOLOGISTS
Donata Francescato*

The aim of this paper is to explore how some macro changes brought about by
globalization have created new opportunities, but also difficult problems for community
psychologists. (a) Economic changes, which have created new jobs in different areas of
the world and promoted the emergence of a sharing economy, but also fostered huge
disparities both within and across countries. (b) Political changes, such as increased
polarization and the growth of nationalist and populist parties, which amplify
divisiveness but go along with a transformation of the notion of citizenship and identity.
(c) Technological changes brought about by the artificial intelligence revolution, which
opens up both opportunities and dangers for job prospects, and by the diffusion of social
networks, able of both promoting political participation and increasing political
polarization. Finally, aims that community psychologists could pursue to help develop
the opportunities and reduce the problems that emerge from these changes are discussed.
Keywords: Globalization, Artificial Intelligence, social networks, political polarization,
community psychology

1.

Introduction

Stark (2011) argues that community psychology has to empower itself by focusing not only
on micro issues of community analysis, but also on macro issues, recognizing that business and
politics have an impact on local processes. The aim of this paper is to explore how some macro
changes brought about by globalization: rapid development of artificial intelligence, diffusion of
social networks and increased political polarization, have created new opportunities, but also
difficult problems for community psychologists. My analysis will primarily be concentrated on
the historic developments that have occurred in the 21st century. The term globalization came
into wide use in the late 20th century, with advances in telecommunication and transportation,

*

Former Professor of Community Psychology, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy

20

with the widespread enactment of free trade agreements and of financial deregulation, and with
increased international trade and investments. Economic liberalization, and new technological
developments led to more interconnected economies and cultures. However, due to the economic
strength of the developed nations and of international corporations headquartered in Europe and
North America, 20th century globalization has in fact been dominated by the spread of Western
culture and values (Parker, 2005). Moreover, globalization has been forced upon certain
countries, particularly those in the developing world, and has reduced the independence of these
nations for the political and economic gain of others. So there has been a power imbalance in
globalization processes, with some western countries exercising a dominant role (Held &
McGrew, 2002). However, in the first two decades of the 21st century, we are witnessing an
historic change: The developed world, which for over a century primarily meant the West plus
Japan, is being economically challenged by the developing world.
Therefore, in the first section of the paper, I examine some economic changes fostered by
globalization in different areas of the world, which have created new jobs in China and India, but
also great environmental problems, and huge disparities in income and wealth both within and
across countries. I then discuss how globalization is no longer simply synonymous with
Americanization or Westernization and how the rise of Chinas global economic power and the
Chinese model of globalization challenge the prevailing western model. Moreover, I describe
how an emerging sharing economy is attempting to transform 21st century capitalism, how
internationalisation processes are changing some of our institutions of higher education,
contributing both to the decline and to the growth of academic community psychology in
different parts of the world.
In the second section of the paper, I turn to give an overview of how economic globalization
processes have increased political polarization between progressives  who want to tax the very
wealthy to improve the economic conditions of the jobless and working poor, fight climate
change and pursue sustainable development (Raworth, 2017)  and conservatives  who support
loosely regulated capitalism, do not believe in climate change and oppose programs of economic
help to the poor as undermining their capacity for self-reliance (Francescato, 2017) .
I then present the position of those authors who worry that fair political representation is
endangered by the influence of the superrich on national and local elections and on the
legislative processes. Furthermore, I describe how negative effects of globalization, climate
change, and local wars have increased the number of refugees and economic migrants fostering
the growth of nationalist and populist parties. Rich-poor, gender, religious, ethnic, country and
city dwellers divides have become more prominent and at the same time they have favoured a
reconceptualization of citizenship, and the growth of identity politics. I maintain that community
psychologists can play a significant role in diminishing some of these divides and recreate a
sense of community, now threatened by these economic and political developments.
In the third part of this paper, I present both the opportunities and the dangers of the artificial
intelligence revolution for job prospects in the next decades. Whether a huge number of workers
will be replaced by A.I., and how fast this change will happen, nobody seems to know. One thing
is certain, many people will lose their jobs and they will need retraining for occupations that
involve creativity, planning and cross domain thinking, characteristics hard to program in robots.
This transformation could increase work opportunities for community psychologists using
empowering training methodologies (Francescato & Zani, 2017). I also discuss whether A.I.
technological innovations will foster or threaten communitarian values.
21

In the fourth section, I examine if social networks promote political participation or increase
political polarization. Several authors maintain that the Internet in general and social media in
particular are the main drivers of political polarization (Sustein, 2017), but recent empirical
studies found that growth in political polarization is largest in groups least likely to use Internet
and social media (Barbera, 2015; Boxell, Gentzkow, & Shapiro, 2017). I also underline that we
as community psychologists, should not leave community building online to Facebook, which
has recently changed its mission, from setting out to connect the world to reducing global
division through community building.
Finally, in the last part of the paper, I examine what aims community psychologists could
pursue both in their roles as activists and as professionals, to help develop the opportunities and
reduce the problems that emerge from the macro changes discussed in the first four parts of the
paper.

2.

Main Economic Changes Fostered by Globalization in different areas of
the world

Supporters of globalization underline that globalization has increased the economic prosperity
of some developing nations, creating new huge middle classes in China, India, and Brazil.
Opponents point out that it has also concentrated wealth and power on the managers of
multinational companies and international financial institutions, increasing income and wealth
inequalities (Held & McGrew, 2002; Bhagat, Segovis, & Nelson, 2012). Economic data support
both theses. Worldwide, there are over 63,000 multinational and global corporations with
821,000 foreign subsidiaries that employ over 90 million people. Globalization processes, such
as delocalization of firms in countries where the cost of labour is low, have brought jobs and
prosperity to millions in developing countries. But corporate greed and corrupt government
officials have promoted an increase in activities such as child labour and modern forms of
slavery. Dislocating factories in countries where labour is cheaper has angered western workers
who lost their jobs.
However, it is not only the developed nations that are complaining about negative effects;
people in developing nations lament that their cities have been reduced to garbage dumps where
industrial waste is accumulated and pollution levels are sky high. Exporting jobs to countries
with fewer environmental and labour regulations means more pollution for residents and less
protection for workers (Aneesh, 2012). Prilleltensky (2012) underlined that the benefits and
burdens of globalization could be more equally distributed if the goal of globalization focused on
achieving a more just society, but globalization has mainly been driven by profit and extractive
colonialism. He pointed out that decisions being made by directors of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and the World Bank have had dire consequences for most citizens while multiplying
profits for managers of global production and financial firms. The American economist Reich
(2012) supported this claim by documenting how in the last three decades in the United States,
the wages of the average worker have stagnated, while Wall Street moguls and executive officers
of global companies have earned more than 300 times the pay of average workers. Reich (2012)
also underscored that partners in private equity firms no longer risk their own money.
So, while risks are vanishing at the top, they have increased dramatically for everyone else:
full-time workers who have worked for decades in a company can now find themselves without a
22

job overnight, with no parachute, no help finding another job, and no health insurance. Cuts in
local and state budgets for social services have resulted in fewer local family services, the loss of
thousand jobs for social workers, and reduced contributions to Head Start and other programs
that provide early childhood education to poor children, with the loss of valuable employment
for some community psychologists. Reich (2012) concluded that the U.S. economy would not
bounce back until Americas surge towards inequality is reversed. The election of Donald
Trump, a billionaire who is reducing taxes for top payers, makes this reversion more unlikely
since Trump has also cut educational, welfare and environmental federal programs.
2.1. Globalization: No longer simply synonymous with Americanization or Westernization
While the growth of the middle class in non-Western developing countries has been
beneficial, economic disparities between rich and poor have also increased within these
developing nations since a growing number of global companies now also come from emerging
countries. A total of 62 companies from BRIC economies (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) are
among the listing of the Fortune 500 in 2013, an increase from only 31 in 2003. Economic
globalization is no longer simply synonymous with Americanization or Westernization. Piketty
(2014) argued, however, that there is a natural tendency to promote high inequality in capitalistic
economies, wherever they are located. Companies that operate globally are becoming
increasingly detached from their home country contexts. This detachment has profound
implications for community psychologists, on a number of fronts. Outsourcing their plants,
multinational enterprises deprive local communities of tax revenues and of job opportunities for
residents. Many local volunteer and non-profit organizations have been forced to cut their
programs. In European countries most affected by the economic crisis, employed community
psychologists have been laid off, and there are fewer opportunities for new masters-level
graduates (Francescato, Tomai, & Solimeno, 2008).
On the other hand, sense of community, one of the key concepts in community psychology, is
acquiring different meanings for different groups. Economically dominant players may acquire a
global sense of community, as they increasingly function as stateless corporations, where work is
outsourced to global locations wherever most profits can be made, and the corporate boards and
the work force are composed of people coming from different cultures, and moving from country
to country. Having a global sense of community may have positive effects, for example, making
people more willing to contribute to help victims of natural disasters in other countries.
However, inhabitants of newly economically deprived local communities, which have lost their
jobs due to relocation of factories to other countries, may develop less sense of community
(Francescato & Zani, 2017).
2.2. The rise of Chinas global economic power and Chinese model of globalization
According to Goldman Sachs, a global investment firm based in New York, by 2050, the
largest economies will be China, followed by the United States and India, Brazil, Mexico,
Russia, and Indonesia. Only two Western European countries (the United Kingdom and
Germany) will be among the top 10 countries in 2050. Since economic power contributes to
political power, the greater economic growth of non-Western countries represents not only an
23

economic but also a political challenge for Western economic and political centres of power
(Bhagat et al., 2012).
Prasad (2017) maintains that China has profited from entering the World Trade Organization
(W.T.O.) in 2001 with the special privileges given to developing countries. Joining the W.T.O
China agreed to gradually open its own market to foreign goods and investments in return for
better access to markets worldwide for its exports. China has boasted his exports but foreign
exporters and investor still face many barriers. To sell goods in China, foreign companies have to
partner with local partners requiring transfers of technological expertise and intellectual property.
Foreign investment is still restricted in certain sectors including financial services like insurance.
Meanwhile, China has become the second largest economy and one of the biggest traders in the
world, gaining more power in the World Trade Organization. China is now one of the prime
users of the WTO dispute settlement process to protect it own interests and counters trade actions
brought against it by other countries. With its rising economic clout, China has also been able to
raise its voting shares at international financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. In these organizations, the Unites States and western countries still hold
dominant positions, because decisions are taken by a supermajority of 85% and the Unites States
having 16% of the vote, has practically veto power on most matters. China has denounced the
undemocratic voting structure of WTO and the World Bank and has created a new international
organization, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, where China holds 26% of the votes but
has no veto power since simple majority takes decisions. Most developing countries and some
western countries like Britain, Germany and France have also joined it (while the USA has not).
China has indicated that it will choose only projects that meet the highest standards in terms of
corporate governance, environmental impact and commercial integrity. American critics have
pointed out that projects of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank avoid sensitive political
issues, like corruption, freedom of expression and human rights
After the election of Trump, who campaigned on abolishing international trade agreements, in
January 2017, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, President Xi Jinping called his country a
champion of free trade and globalization. Moreover, at and international conference in Beijing in
2017 he laid out China grand vision of promoting global integration by linking Asia Europe and
beyond, through a new network of roads, railways and sea routes  the New Silk Road. With
Trumps America pulling back from global leadership, China is fashioning a new form of
multilateralism built on principles very different from the type of global order the United States
and other western countries, which theoretically at least, were built on trust and mutual
cooperation in economic matters but also on promoting the values of democracy, human rights
and freedom of expression. China may also take a global leadership role in an effort to promote
climate change, given that Trump has completely abdicated this role, and seems bent on
sabotaging even the international agreements to lower carbon dioxide emissions in the next
decade to lessen global warming.
2.3. Will the Sharing Economy transform 21th century capitalism?
Some authors (Friedman, 2005, 2013) point out that the emerging sharing economy, that
includes a range of activities transacted over online platforms, could transform 21st century
capitalism. New disruptive business models include: on-demand (Uber), rental (Airbnb), gig
(TaskRabbit), access (Spotify), collaboration (WeWork), platforms (Amazon), circular
24

(ThredUP) and peer-to-peer (Lufax). These tech-focused models are unlocking the value of
unused and underused assets, driving a shift from asset-heavy to asset-light businesses and
enabling access over ownership. Consumers are driving adoption as they hit peak stuff,
embracing a shift to thrift and the experience economy.
The Media industry represents a prime example of how the sharing economy, emphasizing
access over ownership and subscription-based streaming-access models, is transforming 21st
century business. The music industry also has seen a shift from vinyl (1950-60s), to cassettes
(1980s), to CDs (1990s) to MP3/digital downloads (2000s), leading to todays music streaming
(2010s) model, which is increasingly becoming the dominant form of listening. Similarly, the
film/movie and home video industry has seen a shift from VHS vs. Betamax (1970s/80s) to HD
DVDs vs. Blu-Ray (2000s) to todays model of video streaming becoming the dominant form of
viewing. All these Sharing Economy Services present themselves as a community of users, and
give much attention to development of a sense of community among them. However, since
profits are primarily given to owners and managers of these online based companies, it is unclear
yet if the sharing economy will actually diminish the concentration of wealth in the hand of few
plutocrats. The sharing of underutilized capacity does not imply an equal sharing of profits. How
profit will be shared will depend probably on policies enacted by politicians both at the national
and international level.
2.4. Growth of internationalization processes in higher education
Globalization processes have nudged colleges and universities to internationalize: reshaping
their purposes to attract international students, deploying their programs across national borders,
concentrating on internationally advantageous educational program niches, and restructuring
work roles or compensation systems to recruit, retain, and manage the very best student and
faculty talents, even if it means investing heavily in recruiting across national borders (Knight,
2004). Supporters point out that internationalization processes have generated work and study
opportunities for many researchers and students from different countries and cultures.
The growth of an international market for college-level research and teaching has fostered a
great increase in university entrepreneurialism, and this competition among higher education
institutions is positive. To remain competitive, higher education institutions require substantial
financial resources, which are obtained by establishing and maintaining a reputation for
academic excellence. Researchers compete to publish in top international journals and to present
papers at international conferences. They connect with other authors who share common
interests, as university professors always have done, but now on an unprecedented scale. Some
regions of the world, like India and China, which used to send their top students to Western
universities, are now becoming poles of attraction for both top academics and students, thanks to
investments by their government in fostering the growth of top academic centres (Bhagat et al.,
2012).
How has this transformation affected community psychologys academic standing in different
regions of the world and how will it affect its prospects in the near future?
One transformation that may have a very positive impact in all aspects of the discipline has been
the development of online learning, especially Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
(CSCL), the most advanced form of online education. CSCL, done in small groups, characterized
by a high level of task- and assessment-sponsored cooperation, asynchronous communication,
25

and the presence of facilitating teachers, can provide high-quality education, contrary to the
misgivings of many professors. Using CSCL, several authors have documented how community
psychology competencies to promote empowerment in small groups, organizations, and local
communities can be learned online. CSCL favours learning among students, through teaching
modules that have precise weekly goals. It provides cooperative exercises in mastering specific
skills, and students can confront what they are doing with what colleagues are producing daily.
CSCL enhances students social capital, empowerment (especially socio-political
empowerment), and various forms of problem-solving efficacy (Francescato, Solimeno, Mebane,
& Tomai, 2009). It even promotes counter stereotypical behaviour in both male and female
students and therefore achieves aims cherished by community psychologist (Francescato,
Mebane, Tomai, Benedetti, & Rosa, 2012; Mebane, Francescato, Porcelli, Iannone, & Attanasio,
2008).
One negative change that has happened instead, especially in some European countries like
Italy and Germany and in the United States, is that several academic departments that once had
graduate programs in community psychology no longer offer them. In Italy the economic crisis
has reduced public funding for universities. The cuts in academia have had particularly negative
consequences for all disciplines such as ours that had a marginal status in most psychology
departments: when a top academic retired no funds were made available to hire new researchers.
In the United States, the situation is more complex: several graduate programs have closed, but
about the same number of new ones have opened. In Latin America as well, some community
psychology academic programs have been short-lived. On the other hand, new community
psychology programs are beginning to operate in several countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin
America.
Globalization in the 20th century had created great expectations of wider sharing of economic
wealth, instead globalization of markets and the creation of new international financial
instruments have contributed to a great increase of economic inequalities.
What effect have these changes brought in the political world? According to Luce (2017) the
strongest glue holding liberal democracies together is economic growth; when this stalls or falls
things take a dark turn. With growing competition for jobs and resources, consensus becomes
harder to reach as politics devolves into more and more of a zero sum game. I will now therefore
turn to give an overview of how economic globalization processes influenced political
developments in different areas of the world, which affect community psychology in several
ways.

3.

Political polarization comes in different forms

3.1. Fair Political Representation Endangered by the Superrich
According to Reich (2012), the worldwide rise of economic inequalities within countries is
threatening the basic democratic principles of political representation in liberal democracies. In
order to be elected or re-elected, politicians in our media-reliant society rely greatly on
advertising, whose costs have risen as campaign spending escalates. For their fundraising,
politicians depend increasingly on donations. In the United States, huge donations come from
chief executive officers and other top executives of big corporations and from traders and fund

26

managers on Wall Street. Christia Freeland (2012) underlines that in the last decade a form of
plutocrat capitalism has developed, since many plutocrats created foundations where
professionals work to solve problems related to all kinds of public affairs: how to improve
collective public transportation, how to deal with homeless and refugees, and how to improve
schools performance of disadvantaged students.
Freeland (2012) maintains that plutocrats politics have been favoured by many because it
was hoped that it could liberate policy making from the messiness and deal making of grass root
and retail politics; and that technocrats employed by the foundations could make better proposals
and actually implement new more effective and less expensive solutions.
However, plutocrats policymaking is failing for two main reasons. First, plutocrat capitalism
has changed forms of civic engagement, and co-opted smart people, who were community
organizers at the local level, to work full time in policy making in foundations. In the post war
era, civic engagement was built through a network of community organizations with thousands
of dues paying members, and activists of old fashioned party machines, which could mobilize
their voters. Now, instead of going to work as community organizers, or taking part in the civil
life of their communities, smart, publicly minded technocrats go to work for plutocrats whose
values they share. The technocrats get high salaries to focus full time on the policy issues they
care about, without doing the hard tasks of building, rallying and serving a permanent mass
membership. So precious resources are taken out from local communities to pursue goals chosen
by the foundations that employ them. Second, working and middleclass people feel unsecure
about their jobs and their retirement, and are afraid of the technological evolution of artificial
intelligence that will further reduce good jobs for humans.
Policies delivered from high, arouse in voters both from the right and the left, suspicion and
mistrust for plutocrats and technicians, who are perceived as part of the one per cent gainers
from globalization that have no personal interest in aiding the lower classes. This divide between
plutocrats aided by technocrats and common voters has promoted more extremist politics and a
more rancorous political debate (Freeland, 2012).
3.2. Rise of nationalist and populist parties increase social divides and political extremisms
Rising inequality, the erosion of jobs for the middle class and the lack of economic
opportunities for low-skilled white males and young people in general, and the rise of mass
immigration has fostered anger and resentment toward economic elites and main-stream media in
many parts of the western world. Reacting to these structural changes, young leftist extremists
used the Internet and social networks to protect rights of minorities and favour inclusive
immigration of not only refugees from war zones but also of economic migrants. Instead, the
extreme right wing movements created sites supporting white supremacy and opposing
immigration, increasing political polarization.
Populist and nationalist parties have grown in the European Union, but also in the Arab world
giving support to authoritarian governments, and have fuelled mass emigration from regions torn
by terrorism and civil wars, such as those in Iraq, Syria, Somalia, Afghanistan and Libya. The
mass exodus of so many civilians increased the fear of many citizens of various European
countries, and the growth of right wing populism and also of extremist left wing small parties
and movements. Political parties and politicians accused of corruption, nepotism and
27

incompetence have lost the trust of most citizens. Old parties have disappeared; new ones come
to the fore, increasing political instability and weakening liberal democracies.
Since the turn of the millennium, on September 11, 2001, according to Luce (2017) we have
seen the failure of two dozen democracies in the world, three in Europe (Russia, Turkey and
Hungary), and above all the ascent to the presidency of the United States by Donald Trump. The
Trump campaign was based on promoting America First, blaming bad trade deals for the loss of
jobs in industrial towns, fighting economic and media elites. Trump promised to curb
immigration, to build a brick and steel wall between United States and Mexico, and to abolish
health and insurance programs implemented by Obama. These campaign ideas and policies have
been upheld by Trump in the first year of his presidency.
Moreover Trump actively favoured political polarization: during the campaign he used
unabashed provocative rhetoric goading attendees at his rallies to rough up protestors. On the
other side, leftist extremists have accused the president of treason, a crime that can carry a death
sentence and compared him to Hitler. Trump has also used an aggressive and violent language on
Twitter, further legitimizing the use of threat of violence in radio, TV and social networks also
by his left wing opponents that followed Sanders. Civic culture is breaking down not only in the
States, but also in several other countries. Political adversaries have become people to be insulted
and often attacked physically. In 2011 for instance, in Great Britain, the shooting of Gabrielle
Gifford by a mentally ill assailant, came during a convulsive political period when a bitter debate
on health care yielded a wave of threats against lawmakers. In Italy proposing new legislation to
give citizenship to children of immigrants born in Italy, lead to heated brawls in the senate
between extremists of the right and government officials. Demonizing political opponents has
fostered the growth of identity politics, which underlines the differences between groups and
people and increases political polarization (Luce, 2017).
3.3. Reconceptualization of citizenship, and growth of identity politics
Several authors believe globalization has fostered a reconceptualization of citizenship. Rather
than seeing themselves as citizens of a region, cultural subgroup, or nation state, many people are
increasingly viewing themselves as entitled to, and ready to participate in, opportunities for the
interaction, work, and consumption on an international scale. Many individuals  especially
those who use the Internet, work in international companies, travel for work or leisure, have one
parent who is born in another country, are in contact with international nongovernmental
institutions  perceive themselves as citizens of the world, free to move about, trade experiences,
seek educational opportunities, and pursue work or entertainment (Bhagat et al., 2012; Tomai et
al., 2004). Citizenship is redefined as sharing a civil creed, regardless of the soil on which a
person was born.
Even so, far right parties still conceive nationhood as anchored firmly to specific territorial,
ethnic, cultural and religious, linguistic grounds and want to protect these specificities by
excluding immigrants who do not share these characteristics.
How does political polarization affect citizenship and identities? According to Amartya Sen
(Brooks, 2017) political polarization forces people to reduce the myriads of our personal
identities and focus on the part of our identity, which is most attacked by others. Sen calls this
process miniaturization: we live in an atomized, individualistic society in which most people
have competing identities, but when you are disrespected for being a Jew, a Christian or a
28

Moslem, a woman, a gay or a transsexual that part or your identity will become more salient as
social psychologists have long sustained. People in a hostile environment often reduce their
many affiliations of their plural identities to the one that is most threatened. The more different
kinds of divides become salient in a society, the more different groups of people have reasons to
feel victimized and everybody gets to assert his or her victimization as worst, and it is the other
people who are the elites. In the USA a country with many divisions, special media companies,
such as Pure Flix have been created, that produce contents for the different types of Christians
(Evangelists, Baptists etc.)1.
According to Mark Lilla (2017) identity communities are often not even real communities,
but just loose groups of individuals narcissistically exploring some trait in their self that others
around them happen to share. Many identity-based communities are not defined by internal
compassion but by external rage, directed sometimes of subgroups within the main groups. For
instance, Spruil (2017) has made an extensive analysis on how identity politics created a rift in
the Womens movement in the USA. In 1977 a conference was organized in Houston for the
ratification of E.R.A. (Equal Rights Amendment) and a wide range of measures including
childcare, elimination of discriminatory insurance and credit practices, reform of divorce and
rape laws, funding for abortion and civil rights for lesbians. Some women who were opposed to
abortion and civil rights for lesbians were not included in the final conference. So they held a
rally outside the conference building, and created a womens family values coalition that cast
feminism not just as erroneous policy, but also as moral transgression. A sign placed next to the
podium of their first rally said: Women libbers, E.R.A. lesbian repent, red the bible while you
are able. These women found common ground in their deep religiosity and opposition to
feminisms perceived diminishment of real womanhood. They found allies in white supremacy
male groups and together they won over the Republican Party leadership. Republicans in the
1970 supported the E.R.A. but by the 1980 presidential election that had changed. The family
values coalition co-opted the party platform, convinced Ronald Reagan and George Bush to take
a pro-life anti-abortion positions, while feminists were not successful in ratifying the E.R.A.
Many white women supporters of family values voted for Trump in 2016.
Akyol (2017) has examined the divides among Muslim immigrants. Many Muslims emigrate
to western countries not only to improve their economic prospects, but because they are attracted
by some western values: freedom of speech, freedom of religion and non discrimination, but they
do not share the values of irreverence toward religion, defence of LGTB people and permissive
attitudes toward sex and dress codes, based on individual preferences. Some try to switch at will
between western and traditional Islamic values. The deeper problem according to Akyol is that
Islam, as a legal and moral tradition developed in a time when the world was a very different
place - there was a very limited concept of individual freedom as people lived in strictly defined
communities. There was no notions of international laws, universal human rights, the secular

1

In 2015 the company introduced an on demand streaming services. It produces programs such as, The American
Bible Family Affair,  The Encounter, a series about people who are visited by Jesus. It also streams sermons, and
documentaries for parents of home schooled children. The company produces movies such as, God is not dead and
The case for Christ, a movie that depicts how a former journalist of The Chicago Tribune goes from being a hardnosed newsman and atheist to devout Christian and minister. Pure Flix has 250.000 paying subscribers that can
choose from a catalogue of 7500 titles and 715,000 unique visitors that want content that suit their specific beliefs
(Rosman 2017)

29

state or freedom of religion. Moreover, Muslims were often the dominant faith, making the rules
to their advantage, such as tolerating non-Muslims as protected but inferior communities.
That pre-modern world is long gone. There is now an increasingly diverse world where
boundaries fade, cultures meet and individuals roam. And the forces that try to promote liberal
globalization are often the very forces that are perceived to despise Islam and threaten Muslims.
Akyol maintains that Muslim opinion leaders have to decide where they stand. Now Muslims
immigrants are split into different subgroups. Some Muslim immigrants in western countries
want a free world with universal principles in which everyone, including Muslim, lives
according to these values. Other Muslims prefer to live in segregated communities where
traditional Islamic values are upheld. The birth of ISIS, which created Islamic state in Iraq and
Syria, and which imposed by force extremist traditional Muslim values, has made the
contradiction between the two different Muslim worldviews very salient, creating conflicts about
different Moslem groups living in western countries.
Community psychologists can play an important role in diminishing intragroup and intergroup
conflicts, using community profile analysis and empowerment training tools. Benedetti, Mebane
and Oancea (2010) used these tools with different groups of migrants from Muslim, Christian
and Hindu backgrounds, in a neighbourhood of Rome, with high presence of immigrants, trying
to make more salient how all the different groups had common interests in improving quality of
life in their shared neighbourhood rather than focusing primarily on what divided them. They
found it was important to include, in these kinds of intervention, children and adolescents, who
are often cultural mediators within their immigrant families.
3.4. Country city divides
The election of Trump showed he received most votes in small towns while Hilary Clinton
had most votes in big cities. When Great Britain held the referendum on Brexit, most Londoners
voted to stay, while country dwellers voted for leaving the European Union. Ross Douthat (2017)
thinks this cities-country divide is going to widen, because big cities attract the educated young,
the wealthy and mostly liberal people. Talented college graduates, compounding their skills
through cooperation and exchange, make cities culturally rich and rife with policy innovations.
But most cities are now places where lower and middle class people have difficulty buying a
house or paying the high rents those talented professionals can afford. The cost of health and
college has increased, there is rising income inequality and lower class mobility. The dwellers in
countries, small town or in areas where industrial plants have closed like Detroit and Cleveland
are resentful that the American dream of self-betterment and a brighter future for ones children
is vanishing. Depression and anger are rising both in the worst segregated parts of cities, where
the middle and lower class can afford to live and in the small towns in the country. Symptoms of
this malaise are the growing opioid epidemics, decline of life expectancy, increase intolerance of
others view point s and contempt for out of touch governing elites and main media, in both
underprivileged urban and rural areas.
Douthat (2017) thinks cities have become like monopolies for the educated young and the
wealthy, and he proposes drastic changes: we should treat liberal cities the way liberals treat
corporate monopolies, not as growth-enhancing assets, but as trusts that concentrate wealth and
power and conspire against the public good. And instead of trying to make them a little more
egalitarian with looser zoning rules and more affordable housing, we should try to break them
30

up. Let us take offices of our federal government, now concentrated in the conurbation of
Greater Washington DC and spread them around in poorer states and smaller cities that need
revitalization. Lets distribute health and science and regulatory agencies in Detroit, Cleveland
and Milwaukee. Douthat also proposed that famous universities like Harvard, and Stanford
open satellite campus in areas well below the median average income, and get discount on higher
tax or their wealthy endowments. He proposes that new business tax credits should encourage
regional diversification, while the state and local tax deduction should be capped, making it more
expensive for the upper class to live in and around high cost high tax metropolitan areas. Finally,
he suggests that the corporation for Public Broadcasting should be expanded with local country
branches and a new corporation for local needs would fund newspapers in smaller cities and
rural areas.
Some of the solutions proposed by Douthat to diminish the growing divides that now plague
our society will have to be adopted very quickly, since we are now facing a new technological
revolution that again will probably make things better for the already wealthy and spread
unemployment among middle and lower classes, whose jobs will be endangered by the artificial
intelligence revolution (De Masi, 2017; Francescato, 2017).

4.

What will artificial intelligence deliver? Further political polarization
and mass unemployment or service jobs of love and wealth
redistribution?

According to Kai-Fu Lee (2017) chairman and chief executive officer of Sinovation Ventures
and President of the Artificial Intelligence institute, we are entering a new era that some call
deglobalization: there will be fewer dislocations of factories in developing countries because
workers will be replaced by hardware robots. Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) applications that
examine huge amount of information from a specific domain (loan repayment histories) and uses
it to make a decision in specific case (whether to give an individual a loan) in the service of a
specific goal (maximizing profits for the lender) will reshape what works means, and how wealth
is created. Many domains are involved, from retail sales, to transportation, to the service
economy. The A.I. revolution is not like the Industrial and the Computer revolutions that
abolished certain jobs and replaced them with others. Instead, A.I. is poised to bring about a wide
scale decimation of jobs, mostly lower paying but also some professional jobs in many domains.
Above all, the A.I. revolution will result in huge profits for the companies that adopt it, and make
their products and services with very little human work. A.I. is an industry in which strength
begets strength. The more data you have, the better your product, the more data you can collect,
the more talent you can attract and the better your product becomes. It is a virtuous cycle and
according to Lee (2017) the United States and China have already amassed the talent, the market
share and the data to become predominant and make enormous profits
In the Internet consumer market seven big companies, three Chinese Baidu, Alibaba and
Tencent and four American Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Amazon dominate the sector. Lee
argues that American businesses will dominate in developed markets and some developing
markets, while Chinese companies will dominate in most developing countries. Lee proposes an
interesting possible solution to the problem of widespread new employment these developments
will bring: to create service jobs of love which are the volunteer jobs of today, which society
31

needs and give people a sense of purpose. Lee proposes that these jobs should be paid through
taxation of wealthy companies in China and the USA. These special taxes would be used to fund
a conditional universal basic income for those who loose their jobs, if they agree to retrain or
commit to a certain number of hours of service of love.
Not everybody agrees that A.I is going to create mass unemployment. Amazon, for instance,
has been blamed for destroying traditional retail jobs by enticing people to shop online. Amazon
has replied that it has been hiring many new entry-level warehouse workers, even having more
than 100.000 robots operating in its warehouses. No workers have been fired, Amazon found
new roles for them. But what happens when the future generation of robots arrives? Martin Ford
author of Rise of Robots (2015) thinks in the future technology will eventually displace many
workers in those warehouses. He thinks this will happen gradually, Amazon may not fire
anybody but will just create less new jobs (Wingfield, 2017).
Whether in the next decades a huge number of workers will be replaced by A.I., and how fast
this change will happen, nobody seems to know. Many new developments have not yet been
realized (as autonomous trucks) and some novel algorithms will certainly be invented (Raworth,
2017). One thing is certain, many people will lose their jobs in the next two decades and they
will need retraining for occupations that involve creativity, planning and cross domain thinking,
characteristics hard to program in robots.
This transformation could increase work opportunities for community psychologists using
empowering training methodologies (Francescato, Tomai, & Solimeno, 2008; Francescato &
Mebane, 2015; Francescato & Zani, 2017). However, this will happen if political leaders take
difficult decisions, like taxing major corporation great profits, which would demand a political
consensus hard to reach in a polarized political world. In fact in the USA Trumps is working to
lower taxes for corporations. Only by strengthening the European Union, which has already
inflicted several fines to Facebook and Google, for not paying taxes on the profits they make in
European countries, there is some hope, that policies enacting huge retraining programs and
conditional universal income as proposed by Lee (2017) could be realized. Populist parties,
which do want to give more power to the European Union might fight these policies, since in a
polarized political world is harder to make these kinds of major decisions. Still the A.I.
revolution gives us a tremendous opportunity to rethink economic inequality on a global scale,
both between and within countries, if we can rediscover a communitarian spirit.
4.1.

Will technological innovations foster or threaten communitarian values?

A South American community psychologist, Malvezzi (2010) noted that communitarian life,
in which human beings find mutuality, affection, and identity, has been threatened by
technological innovations, in three main ways. First, there is the subjection of routine, social and
affective parts of our lives to the determinism of technology. Technological procedures have
become important mediators in selfother relationship. People tend to rely more on technological
gadgets to meet their needs than on other people. Sensation seeking is becoming more important
than affection. Second, a neoliberal market ideology promotes the creation of a-temporal
individuals: mobile phones, which when Internet-connected, permit viewing programs made
decades ago and still available today. Moreover, mobile phones make it easier to escape from the
local context of ones existence, undermining one of the pillars of communitarian lifestyle, based
on sharing time and physical and symbolic place. Third, technological changes brought about by
32

globalization in the production process increase the fragmentation of life. Objects are conceived,
manufactured, and assembled in diverse places; users do not witness the production process or
know the people involved, and therefore reciprocity is weakened.
However, Malvezzi (2010) maintained that globalization also creates new forms of
community building. Local companies are increasingly relying on teamwork among international
collaborators, creating in these groups some of the conditions that promote sense of community
(synergy, creativity, collective competencies, and commitment). However, often these work
communities are focused only on results required for competing with other firms and do not
emancipate their members. On the contrary they overwork and overstress their employees,
making it more difficult for them to achieve a satisfactory lifework balance and to become
active citizens in their residential communities (Florida, 2005).
For Bhagat et al. (2012), by increasing the demand for products, globalization has augmented
the rate of production and created new employment opportunities. Globalization has raised the
numbers, power, and skills of employees such as women, ethnic minorities, and international
migrants, creating a new multicultural and multinational workforce. This new workforce presents
specific psychological problems that can benefit from a community psychology perspective that
focuses on the mutual influence of individuals and their contexts. For instance, the elite
employees who differ from their White European or American managers in
racial/cultural/national origins may experience cultural confusion and acculturation process
difficulties, while gender-difference interactions with cultural background may contribute to
emotional turmoil affecting extra work activities as well as family ties.
The new workforce composition has also had positive consequences. It has increased
managerial attention to cultural diversity as an impetus for organizational effectiveness. These
new human resources provide a competitive advantage due to increasing creativity and
innovation, problem-solving quality, and organizational flexibility as dimensions of business
performance. Specific cultural and gender-relevant workforce issues are discussed in knowledge
sharing, reward allocations, and informational research briefs describing employee selection. In
several international corporations there has been a shift from a multicultural perspective to a
cultural hybridization approach. By merging local and Western management policies, a new
hybrid corporate management emerges in which flexible practices are based on participatory
systems and the integration of different cultures (Bhagat et al., 2012).
New job opportunities are increasing for organizational and community psychologists with
experience promoting appreciation of diversity, in all its multifaceted expressions, in companies,
nongovernmental international associations, and public organizations. Occupational
opportunities for psychologists who can organize employee assistance programs to cope with
work stress with cultural hybrid perspectives are also rising. This includes creating preventive
stress management programs, aimed at improving health and wellbeing at work that will expand
beyond current individualistic, job oriented initiatives to include more collectivistic, employeeoriented interventions. But it can also give community psychology opportunities to focus on
organizational and policy change, which will empower women and minorities within these
organizations, fostering a power-sharing approach to globalization (Francescato, 2017).

5.

Do social networks promote political participation or do they increase
political polarization?
33

Social media are transforming the way in which citizens consume political information.
Individuals now have access to a wider span of viewpoints about news events, and most of this
information is not coming through the traditional channels, but either directly from political
actors or through their friends and relatives. According to Germano and Sobbrio (2017) however,
ranking algorithms are the information gatekeepers of the Internet era, which influence opinion
dynamics. They found that ranking algorithms can contribute towards the diffusion of
misinformation (e.g., "fake news"), since lower ex-ante accuracy of content of minority websites
can actually increase their overall traffic share.
Other authors fear that the Internet sites and social media function as an echo chamber,
where citizens are primarily exposed to like-minded political views. This process could occur
especially among Internet users who habitually visit extremist leftwing or rightwing chats, which
spread a very negative vision of political opponents, furthering political polarization (Sustein,
2017).
Some authors point out that the interactive nature of social media creates opportunities for
individuals to discuss political events with their peers, including those with whom they have
weak social ties. They maintain that the great spread of global social networks like Twitter and
Facebook has created both a new kind of active citizenship, which expresses itself mainly
through the Internet, promoting political online blogs, online groups, and virtual communities,
which sometimes organize huge face-to-face street protests around specific events. However,
these streets protests organized online also may contribute to further political polarizations since
often counterdemonstrations are also staged and members of the two rival groups have violent
clashes which require police intervention to prevent bloodshed (Krastev, 2017).
Two recent studies have tried to explore if social networks favour or diminish political
polarization. Barbera (2015) found lower political extremism in Twitter and Facebook users in
Germany, Spain and USA compared with older users and non-users of Internet and social media.
These results argue against the hypothesis that the Internet in general and social media in
particular are the main drivers of political polarization. On the contrary, Barbera found that
growth in political polarization is largest in groups least likely to use Internet and social media.
Boxell, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2017) used nine measures of political polarization ranging from
straight voting to affective polarization, which they defined as the tendency of people identifying
as Republicans and Democrats to view opposite partisan negatively and co-partisans positively.
Less than 20% of those 65 years and older used social media while 80% of those ages 18 to 29
were frequent users. For eight of the nine individual measures, polarization increased more for
older than younger. These findings confirm those of Barbera (2015): Twitter and Facebook
increase exposure to political diversity, which seems to induce political moderation. Neither of
these two studies explored if being a member of Twitter or Facebook increases sense of
community, and reduce global divisions, which the founder of Facebook has declared to be
Facebooks new mission.
5.1. Are we as community psychologists, going to leave community building to Facebook?
Originally setting out to connect the world, Facebook now wants to focus on reducing global
division. The company's official new mission statement is: give people the power to build
community and bring the world closer together, to tackle the huge challenges that we face like
34

ending poverty, curing diseases, stopping climate change, spreading freedom and tolerance, and
stopping violence. The new mission requires that Facebook should empower its users to build
community by adding some new features aimed at making things easier for Facebook Group
administrators. New features include real-time metrics about group growth, engagement, and
membership request filtering, tools to help remove "bad actors," scheduled posting, and groupto-group linking.
Several studies have documented that digital platforms and mobile phones can foster social
capital (Wellman, Rainee, & Wellman, 2014) and therefore have the potential to develop sense
of community among groups of Facebook users. But do we want to leave community building to
Facebook? Can we trust Zuckerberg? He is mining the data we furnish interacting on Facebook,
using them to profile different groups of people who will be more receptive to specific kinds of
advertising. Moreover, according to Vaidhyanathan (2017) Facebook has allowed dark posts
(unpublished page post ads), which are seen only by a specific audience, obscured by the flow of
millions of posts within Facebook News Feed. They are ephemeral: they disappear after a certain
amount of time. These dark posts are not only commercial ads to sell services and goods, but
also political ads, which violate the core principle of transparency in political advertising:
political ads should be easily visible to everyone, viewers are supposed to understand that they
are political ads and where they come from and who pays for them. Instead, Facebook has
allowed the use of dark posts also in political campaigns: it revealed only after the 2016 election,
in September 2017, that hundreds of Russia-based accounts had run anti- Hilary Clinton ads
precisely aimed at Facebook users whose demographic profiles implied a vulnerability to
political propaganda. The majority of the ads (about 3,000 placed by 470 accounts and pages
spending about 100,000 dollars) according to Alex Stamos, head of security at Facebook, did not
directly mention presidential candidates but appeared to focus on amplifying divisive social and
political messages across the ideological spectrum-touching on topics from L.G.B.T. matters to
race issues, to immigration to gun rights (Vaidhyanathan, 2017, p. 11).
Facebook has pledged to install better filtering systems using artificial intelligence and
machine learning to flag accounts that are run by automated bots or violate the sites terms of
services, but still human beings will review troublesome accounts only long after the damage has
been done.

6.

What can community psychologists do as social activists and
practitioners?

To tackle the multiple challenges that 21st globalization, new technological innovations like
A.I, diffusion of social media, and political polarization have created, as described in the first
four parts of this paper, it is urgent, as Francescato and Zani (2017) suggest, that we should
integrate both critical community psychology insights and improve the skills of practicing
community psychologists.
6.1. Priorities for community psychologist as social activists

35

Some critical community psychologists (Kagan, Burton, Duckett, Lawthom, & Siddiquee,
2011) think that community psychologists should commit to political engagement at the local,
national, and international levels. Community psychologists should support individuals, groups,
organizations, or movements that are working to oppose inequality and disempowerment, to
promote action on global warming and to protect the environment, and to fight for quality public
services and against privatization of national health services. Stark (2011) argues that community
psychology has to empower itself by focusing not only on micro issues of community analysis,
but also on macro issues, recognizing that business and politics have an impact on local
processes.
Community psychologists should become more involved in shaping social policy. We should
partner with urban planners, social scientists, economists, environmentalists and many others to
plan and implement innovative projects. Prilleltensky (2012) argues that to resist the pernicious
effects of globalization, cope with its implications, and maximize its opportunities, we should
increase peoples understanding of the impact of globalization on their daily living. To move
from victims of globalization to agents of change, individuals and groups need to understand the
way globalization affects them.
Reflecting on the main opportunities and problems emerging considering the four macro
issues discussed in this paper, I would like community psychologists as social activists to focus
on four crucial issues. First, I think we should support more strongly environmental activists
since floods, hurricanes, and drought have hugely increased the number of environmental
refugees. If we do not take care of the planet that we all inhabit, we will waste all our economic,
social and personal resources fighting one emergency after another, and very little will be
available for prevention programs. Second, I believe we should strongly favour policies like the
ones proposed by Lee (2017) to lower economic inequalities by increasing taxes for wealthy
corporations that will benefit from the A.I. revolution. According to the university of Oxford
economist Kate Raworth (2017) we should tackle environmental problems and economic and
social inequalities together, because both have their roots on the out-dated theoretical
assumptions of neo-liberal financial capitalism. She proposes to promote a circular economy,
capable to regenerate ecological natural systems and redistribute resources to allow all
inhabitants of our planet to live with dignity in a safe and fair place.
Third, we should monitor what happens on social networks and partner with those which
demand that social networks like Facebook and Twitter remove dark posts, especially those
that deal with political propaganda, because citizens have a right to know who pays and post
these ads.
Fourth, community psychologists need to join forces with the other agents of change, making
community psychology theoretical contributions and professional competences better known and
available.
6.2. Priorities for community psychology as practitioners
As community psychology practitioners, we should work on building bridges on some of the
main issues that now foster bitter political polarization at the local level. In Europe, for instance,
we should privilege empowering programs for young people who neither work nor study (the
NEET generation); for workers displaced by A.I., for the integration of immigrants from
different religious and ethnic groups, and for women victims of domestic violence, because we
36

have as community psychologists accumulated innovative intervention methodologies on these
issues that will make our interventions more effective.
We can for instance favour immigrants integration using community profiling and networks
building. Community Profiling and Network building is a participatory action research, through
which we can find out what particular problems and strengths characterize a local community for
different groups of residents and what are their most desired changes2.
We can also empower local organizations that provide help to women victims of violence. In
the last decades many centres for battered women have been created in various localities
worldwide, and more need to be developed given the huge magnitude of the problems.
Community psychologists can facilitate the empowerment of these organizations and of the
women that provide and receive support, through PMOA: Participatory Multidimensional
Organizational Analysis. Using PMOA, members examine the strong points and the problem
areas of their organization across four dimensions (structural-strategic, functional, psychoenvironmental and cultural), using a variety of participatory methodologies, and propose possible
solutions (Francescato & Aber, 2015; Francescato & Zani, 2013; Francescato, Tomai, &
Mebane, 2006).
As practitioners we can also retrain workers displaced by A.I. and N.E.E.T. through sociopolitical empowerment labs. Socio political empowerment labs integrate concepts and tools from
the affective education movement and feminist and liberation psychology consciousness raising
groups, and community psychology methodologies to explore the congruence between personal
desires and competences and what the outside world offer could be very useful of empowering
workers displaced by A.I.3

2

Eight profiles: territorial, demographic, economic, service and institutional, anthropological and psychological
perceptions and visions of the future are examined. First a core research group made up of experts of each profile is
formed and then interviews with experts are performed. Afterwards, special focus groups with the dominant and
marginalized groups of the community, for instance groups of local and of immigrants from different countries, are
carried out to explore perceptions, emotions, desires and fears for the future of the community. In each focus group
first a preliminary analysis is carried out: participants use brainstorming techniques to come up with positive and
negative aspects of their community. Each comment is then classified as primarily belonging to one of the eight
profiles, if more positive points are mentioned, this is seen as an indicator of a perceived empowered community; if
more negative comments appear, it is an indicator of a perceived disempowered community. Then participants are
invited to develop a plot for a movie script about their community. After this creative phase and the presentation of
its results through narration and dramatization, groups members are invited to discuss their movie script contents,
the emotions they experienced and portrayed in the narratives, the problems and strengths that emerge from their
narrative about their community. Afterwards participants focus on the future of the community and outline possible
solutions to identified problems, through networks building (Arcidiacono, Tuozzi & Procentese, 2016; Francescato
& Mebane, 2015; Francescato & Zani, 2017).
3
These labs take into consideration the negative emotions that the experience of losing a job entails and try to
explore workers desires for the future using pluralist methodologies (such exploration of needs and desires promoted
by families, previous work experiences; and by specific mass media used daily and by those available during their
early adolescence - favourite songs, movies, internet sites etc.). Afterwards participants examine the political
socialization experienced in family, peer groups, school and specific mass media and social networks, and how one
can use media to actively promote desired political changes. Then participants detect the strong and weak points of
the small groups of which they are members, and using short versions of PMOA and community profiling, they
explore opportunities and problem areas of these territorial contexts. Finally, they select priorities for personal
change that they can manage on their own. For desired collective changes, participants identify other people, groups
and/or institutions with which they have to network to achieve these wider goals (Francescato & Zani, 2017).

37

Integrating the activist and the practitioner roles will permit us to overcome some of their
limits. Community psychologists who focus only on activism often do not recognize the great
disparities that exist between the multitude of economic, political, environmental problems that
beset our planet and the means community psychologists have to solve them. On the other end
community practitioners sometimes focus too much on local issues neglecting the broader global
roots of various forms of oppressions: to reach integration we need to show respect to both roles
recognizing their limits and their strengths.

References
Akyol, M. (2017). The Islamic Jesus: How the king of the Jews became a prophet of the
Muslims. New York, NY: St Martins Press.
Aneesh, A. (2012). Negotiating globalization: Men and women of Indias call centers. Journal of
Social Issues, 68, 514532. doi: 10.1111/j.1540- 4560.2012.01761.x
Arcidiacono, C. (2013). Reflections and action in community psychology (ECPA Bulletin No. 1).
Retrieved from http//www.ecpa-online.eu
Arcidiacono, C., Tuozzi, T., & Procentese, F. (2016). Community Profiling in participatory
action research. In L. A. Jason & D. S. Glenwick (Eds.), Handbook of methodological
approaches to community-based research: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods (pp.
355364). New York, NY: Oxford University Press,.
Barbera, P. (2015). How social media reduces mass political polarization. Evidence from
Germany,
Spain,
and
the
U.S
Retrieved
from
http://pablobarbera.com/static/barbera_polarization_APSA.pdf
Benedetti, M., Mebane, M., & Oancea, D. (2010). Promozione del dialogo interculturale in un
quartiere multietnico attraverso una ricerca intervento sui profili di comunit [Promoting
intercultural dialogue in a multicultural neighborhood: An action-research on community
profiles]. Psicologia di Comunit, 1, 87-97,
Bhagat, R. B., Segovis, J. C., & Nelson, T. A. (2012). Work stress and coping in the era of
globalization. New York, NY: Routledge.
Boxell, L., Gentzkow, M. & Shapiro, J. M. (2017). Is the Internet causing political polarization?
Evidence from demographics. NBER Working Paper No. 23258. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2937528
Brooks, D. (2017, September 1). In praise of equipoise. The New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/01/opinion/in-praise-of-equipoise.html?_r=0
De Masi, D. (2017). Lavorare gratis, lavorare tutti [Working for free, working all]. Milano,
Italy: Rizzoli.
Douthat, R. (2017, March 25) Break up the liberal city. The New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/25/opinion/sunday/break-up-the-liberalcity.html?mcubz=0
Florida, R. (2005). The flight of the creative class. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Ford, M. (2015). The rise of robots. Technology and the threat of jobless future. New York, NY:
Basic Books.

38

Francescato, D. (2017). A critical look at globalization processes and at the internationalization
of community psychology. In M. Bond, C. Keys & I. Serrano-Garcia (Eds.), APA Handbook
of Community Psychology, vol. 1 (pp. 485501). Washington D.C.: APA.
Francescato, D., & Aber, M. (2015). Learning from organizational theory to build organizational
empowerment. Journal of Community Psychology, 43(6), 717738. doi: 10.1002/jcop.21753
Francescato, D., & Mebane, M. (2015). Learning innovative methodologies to foster personal,
organizational and community empowerment through online and face-to-face community
psychology courses. Universitas Psychologica, 14(4), 1525. doi: 10.114/Javeriana.upsy144.limf
Francescato, D., Mebane, M., Tomai, M., Benedetti, M., & Rosa, V. (2012). Promoting social
capital, empowerment and counter-stereotypical behavior in male and female students in
online CSCL communities. In H. Cuadra-Montiel (Ed.), Globalization  Education and
management agendas (pp. 75-108). London: InTech.
Francescato, D., Solimeno A., Mebane, M., & Tomai, M. (2009). Increasing students perceived
political empowerment through online and face-to-face community psychology seminars.
Journal of Community Psychology, 37, 874-894. doi: 10.1002/jcop.20338
Francescato, D., Tomai, M., & Mebane, M. (2006) Psicologia comunitaria en la ensenanza y la
orientacion. Experiencias de formacion: presencial y online. Madrid, Spain: Narcea.
Francescato, D., Tomai, M., & Solimeno, A. (2008) Lavorare e decidere meglio in
organizzazioni empowered e empowering [Improved work and decision making in
empowered and empowering organizations]. Milano, Italy: Franco Angeli.
Francescato, D. & Zani, B. (2013). Community psychology practice competencies in
undergraduate and graduate programs in Italy. Global Journal of Community Psychology
Practice, 4(4), 1-12. Retrieved from http://www.gjcpp.org
Francescato, D., & Zani, B. (2010). Community psychology in Europe: More needed, less
wanted. Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 20, 445-454. doi:
10.1002/casp.1066
Francescato, D., & Zani, B. (2017) Strengthening community psychology in Europe through
increasing professional competencies for the new Territorial Community Psychologists.
Global Journal of Community Psychology Practice, 8(1), 1-14. Retrieved from
http://www.gjcpp.org
Freeland, C. (2012). Plutocrats: The rise of the new global super-rich and the fall of everyone
else. New York, NY: Penguin Press.
Friedman, T. L. (2005). The world is flat. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Friedman, T. L. (2013, July 20). Welcome to the Sharing Economy. The New York Times.
Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/21/opinion/sunday/friedman-welcome-tothesharing-economy.html?pagewanted=all
Germano, F., & Sobbrio, F. (2017, April). Opinion dynamics via search engines (and other
algorithmic gatekeepers). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2890853 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2890853
Held, D., & McGrew, A. (2002). Governing globalization: Power, authority, and global
governance. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
Kagan, C., Burton, M., Duckett, P., Lawthom, R. & Siddiquee, A. (2011). Critical community
psychology. Chichester, UK: BPS Blackwell, Wiley.
Knight, J. (2004). Internationalization remodelled: Definition, approaches, and rationales.
Journal of Studies in Intercultural Education, 8, 531. doi:10.1177/1028315303260832.
39

Krastev, I. (2017, April 26). The movie that explains Central Europes protesters. The New York
Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/opinion/the-movie-thatexplains-central-europes-protesters.html
Lee, K. F. (2017, June 24). The real threat of artificial intelligence. The New York Times.
Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/24/opinion/sunday/artificial-intelligenceeconomic-inequality.html?mcubz=0
Lilla, M. (2017). The once and future liberal. After identity politics. New York, NY: Harper.
Luce, E. (2017). Retreat of western liberalism. Boston, MA: Little Brown Book.
Malvezzi, S. (2010). O convivio entre geraes na empresa: Dilogo, ou con ito? [Get-together
between generations at the enterprise: Dialogue, or con it]. Belo Horizonte, Brazil: Universida
de Federal de Minas Gerais.
Mebane, M., Francescato, D., Porcelli, R., Iannone, A., & Attanasio, C. (2008). Evaluation of the
efficacy of affective education online training in promoting academic and professional
learning and social capital. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 24, 119. doi: 10.1080/10447310701771498
Parker, B. (2005). Introduction to globalization and business. London, England: Sage.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the 21st century (A. Goldhammer, Trans.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Prasad, E. (2017, September 1). How China aims to limit the Wests global influence. The New
York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/01/opinion/china-westdemocracy.html?mcubz=0
Prilleltensky, I. (2012). The what, why, who, and how of globalization: What is psychology to
do? Journal of Social Issues, 68, 612628. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2012.01766.x
PricewaterhouseCoopers Report (2015). The sharing economy. Retrieved from
https://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology/publications/assets/pwc-consumer-intelligenceseries-the-sharing-economy.pdf
Raworth, K. (2017). Leconomia della ciambella [The economy of the doughnut]. Milano, Italy:
Edizioni Ambiente.
Reich, R. (2012). Beyond outrage: What has gone wrong with our economy and our democracy
and how to fix it. New York, NY: Vintage.
Rosman, K. (2017, April 25). Bing-worthy television for believers. The New York Times.
Retrieved from https.nytimes.com/2017/04/22/style/forget-netflix-and-chill-try-pure-flix-andpray.html
Stark, W. (2011). Community psychology as a linking science. Potentials and challenges for
transdisciplinary competencies. In E. Almeida (Ed.), International community psychology:
Community approaches to contemporary social problems (pp. 123136). Puebla, Mxico:
Universidad Interamericana.
Tomai, M., Francescato, D., And, M., Mebane, M., Porcelli, R., & Bolognese, S. (2004).
Globalism and localism: Meanings of sense of community at the local, national, European and
world levels. In A. Snchez Vidal, A. Combrano Costanzo & M. Palacin Lois (Eds.),
Psicologia comunitaria Europea: Comunidad, poder, tica, e valores [European community
psychology: Community, power, ethics, and values] (pp. 237246). Barcelona, Spain:
Universidad de Barcelona.
Vaidhyanathan, S. (2017, September 8). Facebook wins. The New York Times. Retrieved form
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/08/opinion/facebook-wins-democracyloses.html?mcubz=0
40

Wellman, B, Rainee, H., & Wellman, B. (2014). Networked: The new social operating system.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press Ltd.
Wingfield, N. (2017, September 10). As Amazon pushes forward with robots, workers find new
roles.
The
New
York
Times.
Retrieved
from
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/10/technology/amazon-robots-workers.html?mcubz=0

41

