 Copyright JASSS

Nicole J. Saam and Andreas Harrer (1999)

Simulating Norms, Social Inequality, and Functional Change in
Artificial Societies
Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation vol. 2, no. 1,
<http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html>
To cite articles published in the Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, please reference the above information and include paragraph numbers if necessary
Received: 25-Nov-98

Accepted: 20-Dec-99

Published: 31-Jan-99

Abstract
In this paper, we compare the computational and sociological study of norms, and resimulate
previous simulations (Conte and Castelfranchi 1995a, Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci 1998)
under slightly different conditions. First, we analyze the relation between norms, social inequality
and functional change more closely. Due to our results, the hypothesis stating that the "finderkeeper" norm while controlling aggression efficaciously reduces social inequality holds only in quite
egalitarian societies. Throughout a variety of inegalitarian societies, it instead increases social
inequality. This argument which can be traced back to Marx is being investigated by use of
computer simulations of artificial societies. Second, we remodel normative behaviour from a
sociological point of view by implementing Haferkamp's theory of action approach to deviant
behaviour. Following the game theoretic models, the computational study of norms has up to now
ignored the importance of power in explaining how norms affect social behaviour, how norms
emerge, become established and internalized, and change. By simulating Haferkamp and repeating
the Conte and Castelfranchi experiments, we demonstrate that it is possible to integrate power into
computational models of norms.
Keywords:
Simulation of norms, Social inequality, Functions of norms

Introduction
1.1
In recent years, the computational study of norms through simulation has grown in importance
(Shoham and Tenneholtz 1992a, Shoham and Tenneholtz 1992b, Conte and Castelfranchi 1995a,
Conte and Castelfranchi 1995b, Walker and Wooldridge 1995, Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci
1998). Most interestingly, the theoretical input to this field of research seems to originate in game
theory, but not in sociology itself, although the sociological study of norms has a tradition going
back more than a hundred years. In this paper we claim that the computational study of norms could
gain from a wider sociological perspective on norms.
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

1

25/08/2014

1.2
In the next section we compare the computational and the sociological study of norms and make
some suggestions to the further development of the computational study of norms. In the third
section we present and discuss the Conte and Castelfranchi model from a wider sociological
perspective. In the fourth section we present two resimulations of the Conte and Castelfranchi model
under slightly different conditions. First, we analyze the relation between norms, social inequality,
and the functions of norms more closely. Our results suggest that the hypothesis stating that the
'finder-keeper' norm while controlling aggression efficaciously reduces social inequality holds only
in egalitarian predator-collector societies. In the majority of inegalitarian societies, it instead
increases social inequality. Second, we remodel normative behaviour from a sociological point of
view and repeat the Conte and Castelfranchi experiments. Finally, some conclusions will be drawn,
and suggestions for further studies will be discussed.

The Computational vs the Sociological Study of Norms
2.1
Social norms are a classical topic of research in sociology. The sociological study of norms aims at
the appropriate definition of norms, the explanation of how norms affect social behaviour, and the
explanation how norms emerge, become established and internalized and change. Like game theory,
the computational study of norms is a formal approach to theory building in the field of norms. It is
hoped that the computational study of norms will advance our knowledge about the interrelation
between cognitive and social processes. Both can be modeled with the help of intelligent agent
technology.
The Computational Study Of Norms
2.2
In the Artificial Intelligence literature a norm is operationalized as a behavioural constraint on
agents which interact with each other in a multi-agent society. Previous studies have taken the
theoretical input from game theory.
Conceptualization Of Norms

2.3
Within game theory three different conceptualizations of norms have been developed (UllmanMargalit 1977):
1. Norms as solutions to problems of co-ordination: Here, norms are seen essentially as
conventions, behavioural conformities that do not presuppose explicit agreements among
agents. They emerge from the individual interests of the agents (Schelling 1960, Lewis 1969),
but do not presuppose explicit agreements among them. Lewis' example is that of two persons
unexpectedly cut off in a telephone conversation. Each has to choose whether to call back or
wait. Norms of coordination emerge gradually from interactional practice. There is no conflict
of utility because both participants want to resume their conversation.
2. Norms as solutions to conflicts of utility: In case of social dilemmas the conflict structure
calls for norms whenever the agents' choices tend to produce a state of affairs that is both
individually and socially undesirable.
3. Norms as solutions to problems of inequality: In this case norms aim at maintaining a state of
affairs in which one party is favoured or privileged at the expense of another.
2.4
Following Ullman-Margalit (1977), Conte and Castelfranchi (1995b: 77) refer to the moral
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

2

25/08/2014

philosopher Hart (1961) who defines norms as 'a prescribed guide for conduct or action which is
generally complied with by the members of a society'. Three features are characteristic of norms:
their prescriptive force, their expected necessity for social life (this concept has been criticized by
Conte and Castelfranchi as vague; Hart himself states 'The rules supported by this serious pressure
are thought important because they are believed to be necessary to the maintenance of social life or
some highly prized feature of it' (Hart 1961: 85)), and expected clashes between norms, on one
hand, and interests and desires of the agents who owe the duty, on the other. Conte and Castelfranchi
(1995b: 80) claim that game theory has not 'produced a general theory of norms as prescriptions,
that includes norms of co-ordination, i.e. conventions, as well as other types of norms.' Game theory
is not able to grasp the complementarity of people in society. Society is seen as a bunch of selfsufficient beings. But some of the goals and interests of the agents cannot be achieved in isolation.
Instead, they call for the skills of other agents. The agents are complementary. Because of this
shortcoming, game theory cannot account for collective rationality. It cannot give a full explanation
of norms which do not always produce distributive advantages, but often only collective ones.
2.5
Conte and Castelfranchi (1993, 1995a, 1995b) and Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci (1998) account
for norms as prescriptions represented in the minds of self-interested agents. They propose a model
in which norms are seen as both macro- and micro-objects, social objects and mental constructs.
Two concepts of normative behaviour are introduced: Norm-abiding behaviour, which appears to
correspond to some norms, and norm-governed ('fully normative', Conte and Castelfranchi 1995b:
90) behaviour, which results from cognitive processing of norms and implies a mental
representation of norms. They discuss the relative advantages of three different architectures of
norm-abiding behaviour: norms as built-in constraints, goals, or obligations. These differ in
reliability, learning, novelty, faculty to change and repair, and social control, and make the
representation of norms increasingly demanding, leading up to norm-governed behaviour (see table
1).
Table 1: Alternative representations of norms inside the agents'
architectures (norm-abiding systems)
Norms
as

built-in
build-in ends (goals):
built-in obligations:
constraints:
cognitive agents are
explicit and specific
norms are seen allowed to choose among mental object; differs
as constraints on competing goals (instead of from a constraint since
the agents'
simply applying procedures it does not
action
and routines) but they treat automatically reduce
repertoires
norms like any other of
the set of actions
(behavioural
their goals
available to the agents;
notion); no truly
and from a goal since it
normative
is not immediately
choice
transformed into a goal
reliability high reliability: low reliability: goals may average reliability:
the constraints be abandoned when they agents may give up
will always be clash with competing, more normative goals, but
executed
urgent needs
this will cost them
more than abondoning
ordinary goals

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

3

25/08/2014

learning no learning:
average learning: build-in
new constraints ends should be added when
are
the system is off-line;
implemented
when the
system is offline
novelty

repair

social
control

normative goals are
autonomously
produced on the
grounds of normative
beliefs, and in principle
beliefs may be
acquired when the
system is on-line
no novelty:
build-in ends may
normative beliefs may
constraints
correspond to prescriptions be formulated as
reduce available and not only to
prescriptions, and not
actions; only
prohibitions; but since
as mere prohibitions
proscriptions, learning is not granted,
that is,
there ought to be a one-toprohibitions
one correspondence
('Don't ...'), can between social norms and
be represented, internal goals with a
but not
consequent high
prescriptions
computational complexity
('Do...')
no repair:
goal-oriented systems
as with any other kind
agents are not ought to be able to try out of goal, plans for
endowed with several solutions and
normative goals are
the capacity for choose those that achieve subject to change and
modifying
their goals to the highest
repair
unsuccessful
degree, before giving up
constraints
their goals
no need
no social control: agents
since normative goals
may have preferences
are a special type of
corresponding to norms or goals, and normative
not; they may cling to these actions have specific
or abandon them as a
costs, agents can be
function of circumstances shown to be interested
in some monitoring of
norms

2.6
The advantages of norm-governed systems are avoiding useless, stupid, and self-destructive
behaviour favoured by the rigid execution of routines, as well as the spreading of errors and
deviations produced by pure imitation. Therefore, it is promising to construct autonomous artificial
agents with a capacity for applying norms. Conte and Castelfranchi put forward the thesis that normgoverned systems are more useful than norm-abiding systems. It has to be tested to see which of
norm-governed or norm-abiding systems perform better. They state that 'all these hypotheses should
be tested computationally. Unfortunately, we are far from being able to execute such a test' (Conte
and Castelfranchi 1995b: 92).
2.7
Conte and Castelfranchi (1995b: 85) describe four roles which agents may adopt in relation to
norms: sovereign, addressee, defender, and external observer, and give a formal description of the
beliefs about norms that must be represented in an addressee's and a sovereign's mind.

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

4

25/08/2014

2.8
As far as implemented models are concerned, the agents in Conte and Castelfranchi's study are the
most advanced ones (Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci 1998: 5.1-5.9; for details see later). They
investigate the costs of complying with norms, as norm-governed systems not only have advantages,
but also disadvantages. Under certain circumstances the normative agents alone bear the cost of
norms while other agents benefit from their presence. Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci introduce
communication and normative reputation into their agents' design. As a result, the spreading of
agents' reputation via communication allows normative agents to co-operate without deliberation at
the expense of non-normative agents, thereby redistributing the costs of normative strategies. The
design of the agents is not yet consistent with their theoretical suggestions. There is no division of
roles such as the sovereign, the addressee, the defender, or the external observer of a norm. From the
computational point of view, the model represents norm-abiding behaviour with norms as built-in
constraints.
The Functions Of Norms

2.9
Implemented computational studies of norms have explored two different functions of norms: to
permit or improve co-ordination among agents (Shoham and Tenneholtz 1992a, Shoham and
Tenneholtz 1992b), and to control aggression between them (Conte and Castelfranchi 1995a,
Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci 1998, Walker and Wooldridge 1995). There is also a third
function which could have been made explicit.
2.10
Conte and Castelfranchi state that 'this type of norm [the finder-keeper norm], while controlling
aggression efficaciously, also reduces the variance of strength among the agents; that is, their
inequality' (Conte and Castelfranchi 1995a: 264). They point out that this norm is not truly a norm of
property, since the possessions are not ascribed exclusively on the grounds of the 'right of birth', but
may be acquired over the course of each agent's life. They investigate distributive rationality (which
leads, in the long run, to the best possible outcome, or the least possible harm, for all agents) and
collective rationality (which leads, in the long run, to the best possible outcome for a collective
entity even though it does not imply the best outcomes for all its subcomponents, see Conte and
Castelfranchi 1995b: 114f). Referring to those norms that control aggression they state: 'Norms seem
to play an equalizing role' (Conte and Castelfranchi 1995b: 115). On the same page, we find as one
of three possible relations between norms and the interests of agents, 'partial tutoriality':
actions prescribed are in the interests of a subset of the MAS at the expense of the rest;
these are either the norms aimed to restore equity, protecting the interests of
underprevileged categories, or, conversely, norms which favour inequality, protecting
the interests of the privileged party (e.g. norms defending private property); (Conte and
Castelfranchi 1995b: 115f).
The concept of partial tutoriality seems to be derived from Ullman-Margalit's 'norms of partiality'. It
is complemented by distributive tutoriality (actions prescribed are in the interests of all members of
the system) and collective tutoriality (actions prescribed are in the interest of the MAS as a
collective, but independent of and outside the interest of its members). Do norms have a function in
relation to (in)equality? Remember Ullman-Margalit's third argument: Norms are solutions to
problems of inequality.
The Sociological Study Of Norms
Conceptualization Of Norms

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

5

25/08/2014

2.11
The sociological study of norms has developed four different conceptualizations of norms (NonnerWinkler 1984), including even an overall suspension of the concept of norms itself:
1. The statistical conceptualization of norms originates in behaviourism. A behavioural pattern
becomes a norm if the majority of actors in fact behave due to this pattern. Thus, norms are
objectively observeable and measureable. From this perspective any regular behaviour
becomes a norm. One cannot distinguish between regular and rule-obeying behaviour, or
conditioned and rule-obeying behaviour, or sanction-avoiding and rule-obeying behaviour.
Examples of this approach are the theories of the formation of social norms by Sherif (1967)
and Geiger (1962).
2. The theories of action of Durkheim, Weber, and Parsons represent the 'sociological'
conceptualization of norms. According to Durkheim norms are social facts which can be
identified through the mere existence of certain sanctions (1965: 112). The sanction does not
constitute the norm, it is the symbol of it 'and as this symbol has the great advantage of being
objective, accessible to observation and even to measurement, it is a good method to prefer it
to the thing it represents' (Durkheim 1966: 426). Durkheim does not deny the reality of a
subjective perspective on norms, but he promotes the methodological principle that scientists
should choose the perspective of an objective observer. It was Weber (1960) who made
explicit the difference between objectively observed behaviour and subjectively intended
action. There are behavioural regularities which are based on practice (customs or tradition),
on similar interest (market behaviour), and on notions of legitimate order. It is constitutive of
normative action that the actor perceives behavioural rules as obliging or representative (1960:
26). In Parson's theory (1964) norms represent institutionalized role expectations. The
objective character of norms is guaranteed by the integration of role expectations into the
cultural system, its subjective character by internalization.
3. Ethnomethodologists deny the overall relevance of the sociological conceptualization of
norms. According to Garfinkel (1967) there is not such a thing as a general norm which is
independent of concrete context conditions. There are only situation specific expectations of
concrete interaction partners which are actively negotiated by both sides. It is then the
question how individuals constitute a common world. Ethnomethodologists have discovered
several basic rules which have a pseudo-normative character. They are seen as obliging, and
deviations are sanctioned. But they are not equivalent to sociological norms: they are far more
deeply rooted in sociality, and are not amenable to reflection. Deviation from these basic rules
is judged in clinical, not moral categories. Furthermore, 'a society's members know the moral
order as perceivedly normal courses of action' (Garfinkel 1967: 35), i.e., in concrete
interactions actors resort to the statistical conceptualization of norms.
4. Finally, developmental psychologists have put forward an ethical conceptualization of norms.
Piaget and Kohlberg (1969, 1971) reconstruct the development of the moral consciousness of
man. At any time, a subject is actively structuring and reflecting his/her social environment.
Throughout his/her moral development three main stages can be distinguished: at the first
stage of preconventional morality a child conforms to norms in order to avoid punishment this corresponds to behaviourism; at the second stage of conventional morality a subject
conforms to norms because he/she has internalized the norms of his family, peer group, or
society - this corresponds to Parson's view; at the third, and final stage of postconventional
morality a subject conforms to norms because of insight into abstract principles that allow for
the foundation and justification of norms - this corresponds to the ethical conceptualization of
norms. At this stage the subject is able to distinguish between statistical norms, 'sociological'
norms, and ethical norms.
The Functions Of Norms

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

6

25/08/2014

2.12
Functional analysis asks for the objective effect that one element of a social system produces for the
system as a whole. There is not necessarily common knowledge about the objective effect of a social
element. Functional analysis in general does not concentrate on where the causal relation lies. Cause
effect-relations are a special case of functional relations. Different causes are functionally equivalent
if they produce the same effect.
2.13
From the beginning, the functions of norms in society as a whole have been a central field of
research in sociology. There are two positions in this debate. First, norms have been analysed as
solutions to social problems (Marx, Durkheim, Parsons). According to Marx (1936) norms are
dependent on the economic foundations of society. Hence, the functions of norms follow the
interests of the ruling class. Following Durkheim 'Society cannot exist if its parts are not solidary',
'morality consists in being solidary' (Durkheim 1966: 399). In Parsons's L-I-G-A or A-G-I-L scheme
norms fulfil the I-(integration) function of social systems. Solidarity is produced primarily at the
level of values, which are shared by more or less everyone in society. Children are socialized by
their parents so that the basic values and norms of society are 'internalized' as parts of their
personalities. As a result, individuals need and want to do what society demands of them. Second,
norms have been analysed as generating social problems themselves: Dahrendorf states that
wherever behaviour is regulated by and measured in terms of established norms, and wherever these
norms are backed by sanctions, a rank order of social status is bound to emerge (Dahrendorf 1962:
102).
Comparison And Suggestions
Conceptualization Of Norms

2.14
Comparing the computational (Shoham and Tenneholtz 1992a, Shoham and Tenneholtz 1992b,
Conte and Castelfranchi 1995a, Conte and Castelfranchi 1995b, Walker and Wooldridge 1995,
Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci 1998) and the sociological study of norms, we find that the
computational development of concepts advances from the statistical to the 'sociological'
conceptualization of norms (especially Conte and Castelfranchi 1995b). It is the intention of these
authors increasingly to differentiate between regular and rule-obeying, or conditioned and ruleobeying, or sanction-avoiding and rule-obeying behaviour. Modelling norms as both macro- and
micro-objects, social objects and mental constructs, they advance towards Weber's position, making
explicit the difference between objectively observed behaviour and subjectively intended action . By
modelling knowledge of others and communication with others their model will soon be able to
include expectations.
2.15
As far as implemented models are concerned, the agents in the Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci's
(1998: 5.1-5.9) study are the most advanced. In order to put forward our theoretical argument here,
we sketch the critical characteristics of their model without going into details. In their model of
normative action, agents move and try to eat food items that are distributed randomly to the world.
Food can be possessed and may be stolen. There is a norm, the finder-keeper norm, that prescribes
'attack an eater unless the food item being eaten is marked as 'owned' by that agent'. The multi-agent
system is composed out of two different sub-populations: agents either respect the finder-keeper
precept (the Respectful) or not (the Cheaters). Either through experience, or through
communications the agents learn whether another agent is a Respectful or a Cheater. From the
sociological point of view, the division into normative (Respectful) and non-normative agents
(Cheaters) is not yet fully convincing. The 'normative' algorithm of the Respectful is modified so
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

7

25/08/2014

that they respect the norm only with agents known to be Respectful. This looks like a sanction
towards the Cheaters, but as the finder-keeper precept does not hold for any Cheater - it is in fact not
prescribed for them - they cannot violate it, and therefore they cannot be sanctioned.
2.16
Following Hart (1961), Conte and Castelfranchi (1995b: 82) have stressed that norms are imposed
obligations. In their model, the finder-keeper precept is not imposed on the Cheaters. The Cheaters
are defined as non-normative, i.e. self-interested agents. Only if norms have been imposed on agents
they can violate them. In this respect, in the Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci model, it is the
Respectful who violate the finder-keeper norm if they do not respect the Cheaters! It is rational that
the Respectful only respect themselves, but how do we know, that decisions about the respect or
disrespect of norms are the result of a rational calculus? Is it rational that the Cheaters always
disrespect the finder-keeper norm? Under the title of deviant behaviour, there is a long research
tradition in sociology that investigates the reasons for a lack of respect of norms which could
advance theory construction here.
2.17
We suggest two modifications to advance the computational concepts of the development of norms:
In order to model normative behaviour more sociologically we suggest imposing norms on all
agents of a MAS, introducing a mechanism that decides whether they respect the norms, and
introducing a mechanism that decides about the defence of norms.
In order to model the conditions of norm violations more sociologically we suggest
consulting sociological theories of deviant behaviour.
The Functions Of Norms

2.18
Whereas the computational study of norms has concentrated on distinct functions of norms, from
the sociological point of view, we have in mind that the functions of norms are relative. They
depend on time and space, like so many other social facts. It would not be surprising to find that
certain norms may also impede co-ordination, or increase aggression. The same holds for norms and
inequality. A certain norm may increase inequality, but under different conditions the same norm
may decrease inequality. We suggest that to advance the computational study of norm functions it
would be desirable to implement functional change in simulation models, in order to investingate the
relative time and space-dependent functions of norms.

The Conte and Castelfranchi Model
3.1
The following design decisions are made by Conte and Castelfranchi (1995a) and Castelfranchi,
Conte and Paolucci (1998): 50 agents are placed randomly into a two-dimensional world that
consists of a 10 * 10 grid with connected edges (a torus). The initial strength of each agent is 40.
Twenty-five food items of nutritional value 20 are distributed randomly on the grid. Each food item
is replenished at a randomly selected location on the grid after it has been consumed. At the
beginning of a match, agents are randomly allocated to locations and are assigned those food items
which happen to fall into their own territories (their von-Neumann neighbourhood). Food possessed
is flagged and each agent knows to whom it belongs. Several types of action that cost resources are
available to each agent in order to find and eat food (see table 2).
Table 2: Types of actions in the Conte and Castelfranchi model

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

8

25/08/2014

Action type
EAT
MOVE-TO-FOODSEEN
MOVE-TO-FOODSMELLED
ATTACK
MOVE-RANDOM
STAY

Order of preference among
these actions
1
2

Cost of action (in
food items)
0
1

3

1

4
5
6

4
1
0

3.2
Actions are supposed to be simultaneous. It may be that an agent does not get to perform its action
because the conditions for performing the action are no longer fulfilled (e.g., two agents planning to
move to the same position cannot both achieve their goal). Depending on built-in routines and
knowledge, agents may decide to attack one another. Three routines are available: blind aggression
('attack an eater to get its food, unless free food is available at a lower cost'), strategic aggression
('attack an eater whenever you perceive it as no stronger than you, unless free food is available at a
lower cost'), and normative aggression ('attack an eater unless the food item being eaten is marked
as 'owned' by that agent', i.e. the finder-keeper norm).
3.3
An experiment consists of 100 matches, each of which includes 2000 games. During each game
each agent performs one action. For each experiment, the number of attacks, the average strength,
and the standard deviation of individual strength is recorded, and the significance of the differences
tested. In the standalone simulation (homogeneous population) the agents using the normative
routine do best at controlling aggression, promoting average strength, and keeping inequality low. In
mixed populations (two subpopulations containing agents each of which behaves according to one
of two routines, ratio 50:50) the normative strategy becomes the worst.

Resimulating Norms
4.1
We have resimulated the Conte and Castelfranchi model in three series of experiments:
1. replication
2. resimulating the relation between norms, social inequality, and the functions of norms
3. remodeling normative behaviour from a sociological point of view
Replication
4.2
First, we have reimplemented the Conte and Castelfranchi model in JAVA according to the model
descriptions in Conte and Castelfranchi (1995a) and Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci (1998). We
have resimulated their original model in order to guarantee that we can reproduce their results
qualitatively. There are only small differences between our reimplementation and the original
model: Actions are not executed simultaneously, but in sequence. This alteration is motivated by
theoretical considerations: if the agents plan their actions and act simultaneously there are many
conflicts between contradicting actions (like moving to the same position, or attacking the same
victim). Planning and acting in sequence decreases the number of conflicts and the results of the
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

9

25/08/2014

simulation are less dependant on random resolutions of conflicting actions. Also, multiple
aggressions do not take place. An agent is attacked consecutively by other agents, whereas it could
be attacked simultaneously by several others in the original model. Simultaneous attacks result in
higher losses than consecutive ones because an agent can be attacked as long as it is in possession of
its food item. After the food item has been robbed it cannot be attacked any longer. As can be seen
from table 4 our replication results reproduce the original results (table 3, reproduced from
Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci 1998: 4.5) qualitatively.
Table 3: The results of the Castelfranci and Conte model
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

Str
4287
4727
5585

st.dev.
204
135
27

St.Dev
1443
1775
604

st.dev.
58
59
41

Agg
9235
4634
3018

st.dev
661
248
76

Source: from JASSS Volume 1, Issue 3, http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/1/3/3.html

Table 4: Replication results
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

Str
4848
5962
7405

st.dev.
38
24
24

St.Dev
1690
1967
404

st.dev.
40
36
33

Agg
14134
5798
1809

st.dev
139
63
61

Key to tables 3 and 4:
The results are gathered from sets of 100 matches for each Strategy. The values shown are from left to right: The average of
the agent's strength (Str) at the end of the match, the standard deviation of Str, the average of the standard deviation (St.
Dev) of the agents' strength values at the end of the match, the standard deviation of St. Dev, the average number of
aggressions (Agg) occuring during one match, and the standard deviation of Agg.

The Relation Between Norms, Social Inequality, And The Functions Of Norms
4.3
Second, we reanalyze the relation between norms, social inequality, and functional change.
Following our suggestions above we have two goals:
1. We want to demonstrate that the thesis that the 'finder-keeper' norm reduces social inequality
while controlling aggression efficaciously holds only in egalitarian predator-collector
societies. Throughout the majority of inegalitarian societies, it instead increases social
inequality. This argument, which can be traced back to Marx, is investigated by use of
computer simulations of artificial societies.
2. We want to demonstrate that societal evolution leads to functional change of norms: More
concretely, we show that the finder-keeper precept while controlling conflict and establishing
an equal distribution of resources in egalitarian predator-collector societies turns to stabilizing
and promoting inequality if we allow private property and heritage, or private property,
heritage and unequal renewal of resources.
First Experiment: Private Property And Heritage
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

10

25/08/2014

4.4
To examine the effect of private property and heritage upon inequality in an agent-society we
extended the Conte and Castelfranchi model: agents may reproduce and the offspring inherit the
sum of the strength of their parents. To keep things simple and the number of agents constant we
decided that one in 100 time steps each agent would have the chance to produce offspring. Then, the
agent chooses another agent who is next to it within its von Neumann-neighbourhood. They unite
their strength, produce two children, divide their total strength and forward it to the children. The
parents die immediately and the children take their places in the grid. The whole reproduction
process is completed in one time step. We varied the share the children inherit from their parents
(alphai = alphaj = 0.5 in experiment 1a, alphai = 0.9, alphaj = 0.1 in experiment 1b). The results are
given in tables 5 and 6.
Table 5: Private property and equal heritage (alpha i = alphaj = 0.5)
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

Str
4832
5935
7387

st.dev.
37
29
27

St.Dev
202
244
77

st.dev.
31
32
10

Agg
14153
5844
1835

st.dev
125
76
67

Table 6: Private property and unequal heritage (alpha i = 0.9, alphaj = 0.1)
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

Str
4852
5958
7404

st.dev.
34
32
29

St.Dev
7662
9304
11392

st.dev.
836
1074
1227

Agg
14059
5790
1808

st.dev
130
67
67

Key to tables 5 and 6:
The results are gathered from sets of 100 matches for each Strategy. The values shown are from left to right: The average of
the agent's strength (Str) at the end of the match, the standard deviation of Str, the average of the standard deviation (St.
Dev) of the agents' strength values at the end of the match, the standard deviation of St. Dev, the average number of
aggressions (Agg) occuring during one match, and the standard deviation of Agg. Alpha i (j) represents the share that child
i (j) inherits from the total strength of its parents.

4.5
As can be seen from table 5, neither the average strength of the agents, nor the number of
aggressions change qualitatively. With variance, or inequality, however, the pattern varies. Private
property and equal heritage prove to be extremely equalizing. The redistribution of strength due to
the equal heritage reduces the inequality among the agents dramatically. This effect has no feedback
on the number of aggressions or the average strength of the agents. The normative strategy is found
to do best at increasing the average strength of the agents, reducing inequality among them, and
reducing aggression.
4.6
As can be seen from table 6, when there is unequal heritage neither the average strength of the
agents, nor the amount of aggressions change qualitatively. With variance, or inequality, however,
the pattern varies. Private property and unequal heritage lead to extreme inequality. The
redistribution of strength due to the unequal heritage increases the inequality among the agents
dramatically. This effect has no feedback on the aggressions or the average strength of the agents.
The normative strategy is found to do best at increasing the average strength of the agents, and
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

11

25/08/2014

reducing aggression, but now, it proves to be worst in producing inequality. Most interestingly, blind
aggression now leads to the highest degree of equality!
Second Experiment: Unequal Renewal Of Resources

4.7
To examine the effect of unequal renewal of resources upon inequality in an agent-society we
extended the Conte and Castelfranchi model. In human societies, the unequal renewal of resources
is a social fact. Merton has called this phenomenon the Matthew effect (Merton 1968), whereas
Zuckerman (1993) used but did not introduce the term cumulative advantage to describe the same
phenomenon. According to the Matthew effect (derived from the New Testament according to St.
Matthew 25,29) those who already own a portion of something shall be given more.
4.8
In our model, the nutritional value of food is no longer constant. When a food item is replenished
and happens to fall at the same location as an agent, the nutritional value is set to depend on the
strength (s) of the agent. The higher the strength of the agent during the previous time step the
larger is the nutritional value (v) of the replenishing food item:
vt = 20 + beta (s t-1 - 40)

(1)

To avoid hopelessly deprived agents the minimum nutritional value of a food item is set to 20. Food
landing on an empty position has the nutritional value of 20.
4.9
With this model, the nutritional value of food items may become very large. The nutritional value
increases with time, as the agents' strength increases with time. For example, a food item landing on
the cell already occupied by an agent of strength 5,000 would have a nutritional value 49,620 (with
beta = 10.0). In order to avoid the dramatic increase of the average strength of the agents (the results
would hardly be comparable to the results of previous experiments with constant nutritional value of
20 units) we introduce a time restriction. An agent cannot consume food items of more than 20
nutritional units at once. Instead, it eats away a portion of 20 in two rounds. Each food item is split
into n portions of size 20, and to consume the portions the agent will need n * 2 time steps. For
instance, it will need 6 rounds to consume a food item of 42 (42 is split into 2 portions of 20 units
and one of 2 units). What we have in mind as the social equivalent in a primitive human society
which respects the finder-keeper norm is a hunter having found a very big resource, e.g. a
mammoth. The hunter and his family will be satiated very soon, but most of the mammoth will
remain. The hunter and his family will need some weeks to consume the whole mammoth before
hunting again. We tried to implement this logic in our model. In the experiments we varied the
extent of the Matthew effect (parameter beta: beta = 0.2 in experiment 2a; beta = 10.0 in experiment
2b, and beta = 0.0375, removed time restriction in experiment 2c). The results are given in tables 7,
8, and 9.
Table 7: Unequal renewal of resources (beta = 0.2)
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

Str
5368
7755
8569

st.dev.
80
40
20

St.Dev
4832
6070
2275

12

st.dev.
116
88
193

Agg
18338
2333
336

st.dev
494
75
35

25/08/2014

Table 8: Unequal renewal of resources (beta = 10.0)
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

Str
6655
8844
9096

st.dev.
322
160
189

St.Dev
7651
8453
7879

st.dev.
216
176
341

Agg
9228
241
42

st.dev
1104
31
12

Table 9: Unequal renewal of resources (beta = 0.0375), time restriction
removed
Strategy
Blind Aggression
Strategic
Normative

Str
246394
280354
842996

st.dev.
3585
3986
4552

St.Dev
192707
224561
331122

st.dev.
22045
27327
73152

Agg
14114
5798
1806

st.dev
141
74
65

Key to tables 7 to 9:
The results are gathered from sets of 100 matches for each Strategy. The values shown are from left to right: The average of
the agent's strength (Str) at the end of the match, the standard deviation of Str, the average of the standard deviation (St.
Dev) of the agents' strength values at the end of the match, the standard deviation of St. Dev, the average number of
aggressions (Agg) occuring during one match, and the standard deviation of Agg. Beta represents the extent of the Matthew
effect.

4.10
As can be seen from tables 7, 8 and 9, the average strength of the agents is slightly greater. The
normative MAS has the highest average strength and the lowest degree of aggression. Compared to
the original model (see Table 1), inequality is much more pronounced. Aggression among the blind
agents has increased because agents who sit on big food items can be attacked much more
frequently. Aggression among the strategic agents is reduced because strong agents who sit on big
food items are not attacked. Also, strong agents restrain more often from attacking others because
they need longer to eat their bigger food items. In societies with highly unequal renewal of resources
(beta = 10.0; beta = 0.0375 with removed time restriction) blind aggression proves to lead to the
lowest degree of inequality! The equalizing function of the normative strategy has vanished. In
experiment 2c the normative strategy becomes the worst with respect to equality. However, because
of the extraordinary high values in average strength and inequality this interpretation should be
treated with caution. In sum, in homogeneous societies, the finder-keeper norm
minimizes aggression in all of our experiments,
maximizes the average strength of the agents in all of our experiments,
but its function with respect to equality depends very much on the initial conditions and the
redistribution of strength. In MAS with private property and equal heritage the finder-keeper
precept has an equalizing function. In MAS with private property and unequal heritage, and in
MAS with highly unequal renewal of resources it increases inequality. If a society changes its
structure from comparatively equal (e.g. a predator-collector society) to comparatively
unequal there is a threshold that leads to a functional change of the finder-keeper precept with
respect to equality (at present, we cannot specify this threshold value).
Remodeling Normative Behaviour From A Sociological Point Of View
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

13

25/08/2014

4.11
Next, we will model normative behaviour from a more sociological point of view. Following our
earlier suggestions we impose norms on all agents of a MAS, introduce a mechanism that decides
about the respect or disrespect of norms, and introduce a mechanism that decides about the defence
of norms. We consult sociological theories on deviant behaviour to specify the theoretical model.
Theory

4.12
We have decided to implement Haferkamp's theory of action approach to deviant behaviour. In his
theory of deviant behaviour Haferkamp (1972, 1976, 1980, 1984, 1987) brings together the
normative (Parsons, Durkheim) and the interpretative (Berger and Luckmann) paradigms, he
combines the theory of action and system theory, and he integrates power and rule as conflict
theoretical elements. Conformity and deviance are seen as two opposed kinds of social action which
follow the same structural principles. His starting point is a multi-group society, not a fictional
primitive society. It is not his intention to describe the original process of the production of deviant
behaviour. Instead, he is interested in the social processes that lead within already existing social
institutions to social behaviour which is labeled as deviant.
4.13
Haferkamp defines norms as conceptions which are internalized by the majority of members of a
social situation. The conception implies the correct (re)actions to defined situations and the certitude
that deviance will be sanctioned (Haferkamp 1980: 31). The concept of norms is central to the
sociology of deviant behaviour. In his theory of action, norms are relevant as internalized rules of
behaviour, behavioural expectations by others, and labels of deviance. As far as sanctions are
concerned, it is the subjective probability to be sanctioned which directs behaviour. Power and rule
are related to deviant behaviour in two ways. Those individuals who are most powerful rule and
therefore decide about the definition and institutionalization of norms, and about the definition and
sanctioning of deviant behaviour. Power and rule, as well as economic resources are distributed
unequally.
4.14
According to Haferkamp (1980), norms are negotiated on the macro level. The negotiation process
is structured into production, definition, integration, and identification. Societal groups differ in their
abiliy to articulate their interests and the resources they can offer to other groups. This asymmetry is
used by the groups which are more resourceful. They transfer some of their resources to the poorer
groups in exchange for the institutionalization of norms which represent the interests of the
resourceful. Thus, the negotiation of norms becomes the prescription of norms. In the end, it is the
scarcity of resources and the efforts to overcome this scarcity that decide about the prescription of
norms (Haferkamp 1980: 51). The resourceful and the non-resourceful internalize the norm. The
resourceful are able and allowed to sanction deviant behaviour. This stabilizes the norm, and the
stabilization of norms increases the power of the resourceful. In more complex societies, the
resourceful delegate sanctioning and social control to new functional groups and pay them for their
support (e.g. the police). In a multi-group society there is no balance of power between the groups.
Instead, inclusive groups ('in-groups') recognize out-groups which produces a feeling of solidarity
between the members of the in-group. In-group and out-group represent conformity and deviance
from the point of view of the in-group (Haferkamp 1976: 100). According to Haferkamp, the outgroups, although exhibiting deviant behaviour from the point of view of the in-groups, may no
longer be defined as anomic: They follow their own norms. As a consequence, in one and the same
social situation, members of different groups expect different behaviours from their members.
Following the distribution of power, only the deviation from the in-group's norms is defined as
deviant behaviour and sanctioned.
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

14

25/08/2014

The Model

4.15
In our model we implement Haferkamp's approach. We start from the Castelfranchi, Conte and
Paoluccis later study with mixed populations (1998: 5.1-5.3). The modeling of the agents is
extended as follows:
The agents live in a two-group society, in-group g1 and out-group g2 . Members of the ingroup are more resourceful and have more power than members of the out-group.
Those individuals who are most powerful rule and therefore decide about the
institutionalization of norms in society as a whole. Each time step members of the in-group
transfer some of their resources to a redistribution agent on the macro level in exchange for
the institutionalization of norm n 1 in situation s1 on the society level. Institutionalization on
the society level means that norm n1 is saved in the knowledge base of the redistribution
agent. The redistribution agent redistributes the resources uniformly to all agents (Here, we
deviate from Haferkamp who redistributes these resources only to members of the out-group.
The problem is, that the redistribution agent in Haferkamp's theory would have to be
omniscient about the membership of each agent with respect to in-group and out-group. This
seems unrealistic to us). Each agent has internalized that on the level of the society norm n1
holds in situation s1 .
The agents are able to identify and define social situations. If certain conditions are given
agent a1 (a2 ) who is a member of the in-group (out-group) will identify and define situation s1
as situation s1 . All agents know that situation s 1 implies norm n1 . Whereas agents of the ingroup comply with norm n1 and show behaviour b1 , the members of the out-group transgress
the norm and show behavior b2 . Deviant behaviour is sanctioned by members of the in-group.
Agent a1 will sanction agent a2 if it observes it reacting by behaviour b2 to situation s1 .
Whenever an agent of the in-group sanctions an agent of the out-group this will increase its
power and decrease its resources.
4.16
The model was implemented using the finder-keeper norm. Situation s 1 is a situation in which an
agent a perceives another agent b who has a claim to the food items which are placed in b's von
Neumann-neighbourhood (the food is 'flagged' for b). Each agent has internalized that on the level
of the society the finder-keeper norm holds in situation s1 . The members of the in-group (out-group)
comply (not) with the finder-keeper norm and show behavior respect-the-finder (attack-any-weakerfinder, or attack-any-finder). These behaviours are the redefined agent's normative, strategic, or
blind aggression strategies introduced by Conte and Castelfranchi (1995a). The agents live in a twogroup society. The probability to be a member of the in-group (out-group) is 50 percent (This
initialization was maintained in order to be able to compare our results to those of the original model
by Conte, Casterfranchi and Paolucci. From a sociological point of view, smaller out-groups are
much more interesting). Members of the in-group (out-group) have an initial strength of 40 (20) and
an initial power of 20 (10) items. Each time step each agent of the in-group transfers 1 unit of its
resources to the redistribution agent who is assumed to be located on the macro level (it has no
location on the grid, it has no defined neighbourhood, it does not act due to the action types
specified in table 2; in sum, it is very different from all other agents). The redistribution agent
redistributes the resources uniformly to all agents. In-group agent a1 will sanction any out-group
agent a2 if it observes it within its territory (von-Neumann neighbourhood) attacking any other
agent a3 . Sanctioning increases a1 's power (+1), decreases its resources (-4), and decreases a2 's
resources (-6). Most important, we have changed the mechanism of unequal renewal of resources.
Food is no longer replenished depending on the individual strength of an agent. Instead, the
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

15

25/08/2014

nutritional value of food now depends on an agent's power (p):
vt = 20 + pt-1

(2)

4.17
The results are given in tables 10 and 11. (The experiment blind vs strategic is not of interest here
because our argument concentrates on the normative strategy. We have changed the algorithm of the
normative strategy. This strategy is not used in the experiment blind vs strategic. If we simulate
blind vs strategic we would need two subcases, one in which the strategic are the in-group and one
with the blind as the in-group. Furthermore, we would have to introduce sanctioning into the blind
as well as the strategic algorithm in case this strategy represents the in-group. The results would not
be comparable to the Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci experiment.)
Results

4.18
As can be seen from tables 10 and 11, in the mixed population case, the normative strategy no
longer beomes the worst (as it was in the Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci experiments). The
normative strategy is now better than the blind one (table 10). The average strength of the
normative is moderately higher, the degree of inequality and the aggressions are lower. The transfer
payments weaken the normative. Also, they have to pay for sanctioning the deviant behaviour of the
out-group agents. These effects are almost compensated by the unequal renewal of resources that
depends on the power of the agents. Here, the in-group members are privileged. Their power
increases slowly but continuously by sanctioning the deviant behaviour of the out-group agents. As
in the Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci experiments, the strategic agents are stronger than the
normative, and the degree of inequality among the normative is lower than among the strategic
(table 11). Most interestingly, the finder-keeper norm no longer controls aggression the most
effectively. Aggression is moderately lower among the strategic: because of the sanctions, the
power of the in-group agents increases. This increases their food items. The strategic now rob
bigger and bigger food items from the normative. They need more and more time to eat the big food
items they have robbed. They do not attack other agents while eating. Therefore, the attacks by the
out-group agents decrease below those of the in-group. Eating big food items takes time. During that
time, the food is not replenished. Therefore, there is a lack of uncontrolled food. The attacks of the
in-group agents increase because they try to recover the big food items they possessed.
Table 10: Normative behavior from a sociological point of view; two subpopulations: Blind vs Normative (50:50)
Strategy
Society
Out-Group: Blind
In-Group: Normative

Str
3647
3437
3717

st.dev.
111
561
635

St.Dev
2261
3038
759

st.dev.
122
174
129

Agg
10352
7775
2757

st.dev Pow st.dev
1395
1164 10 0
415 209 20

Table 11: Normative behavior from a sociological point of view; two subpopulations: Strategic vs Normative (50:50)
Strategy

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

Str

st.dev. St.Dev st.dev. Agg st.dev Pow st.dev

16

25/08/2014

Society
4116 61
Out-Group: Strategic 6195 93
In-Group: Normative 2086 461

2236
1149
584

252
172
129

7651 416
3793 428
3858 232

10 0
118 8

Key to tables 10 and 11:
The results are gathered from sets of 100 matches for each Strategy. The values shown are from left to right: The average of
the agent's strength (Str) at the end of the match, the standard deviation of Str, the average of the standard deviation (St.
Dev) of the agents' strength values at the end of the match, the standard deviation of St. Dev, the average number of
aggressions (Agg) occuring during one match, the standard deviation of Agg, the average value of power (Pow) and the
standard deviation of Pow.

4.19
However, this model has a serious problem. It is incomplete with respect to the power variable. The
power of the in-group agents increases continuously, whereas the power of the out-group agents
remains constant. Power is not consumed. The problem can be traced back to Haferkamp who has
not presented a closed theory of power within his theory of deviant behaviour. We have to work on
this problem and include a theory of power in order to be a convincing functional equivalent to
Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci's later study with mixed populations and communication.
4.20
Nevertheless, we are convinced that it is a promising approach to include power in the
computational study of norms. Following the game theoretic models, the computational study of
norms has up to now ignored the importance of power in explaining how norms affect social
behaviour, how norms emerge, become established and internalized, and change. In our model, we
have introduced power as an important variable that decides about the institutionalization of norms
and the distribution of wealth. At present, as the model has to be systematically tested with respect to
the robustness of its results, we would like to stress the advance in theory adequacy that our model
represents. The numerical results are also important, but only a sensitivity analysis will reveal
systematically the critical values of parameters within the parameter space that lead to a functional
change of the finder-keeper precept with respect to equality and aggression.

Conclusion and Future Work
5.1
In our experiments we have demonstrated that simulating artificial societies advances our
knowledge about social norms, inequality, and functional change, and that the computational study
of norms gains from a wider sociological perspective on norms that includes power.
5.2
We have given an example of the functional change of norms. The function of the finder-keeper
norm with respect to equality depends very much on the initial conditions and the redistribution of
strength. In a homogeneous MAS with private property and equal heritage the finder-keeper precept
has an equalizing function. In a MAS with private property and unequal heritage, and in a MAS with
highly unequal renewal of resources it increases inequality. We suggest it is necessary to investigate
systematically the functional change of norms. We encourage all interested readers to consult Java
applets of our simulation models.
5.3
Following the game theoretic models, the computational study of norms had so far ignored the
importance of power in explaining how norms affect social behaviour, how norms emerge, become
established and internalized, and change. By simulating Haferkamp's theory of action approach to
deviant behaviour, we have demonstrated that it is possible to integrate power into computational
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

17

25/08/2014

models of norms. To improve our model, we will have to (1) include a theory of power, and to (2)
make the model dynamic. At present, our implementation of Haferkamp's conception is static.
5.4
In the following, we will concentrate on the second question. There are two promising approaches
to building a dynamic model:
1. Haferkamp's dynamic conception is that groups compete with each other and try to expand
their norms to further groups. His explanation is on the macro level and he argues that on
different levels of generality there exist different in-groups and out-groups. The in-groups try
to extend their norms to levels of higher generality. On levels of higher generality personal
contact between the members of the in-group becomes more difficult which leads to the
formation of new in-groups on levels of lower generality.
2. Sutherland has given a dynamic explanation of deviant behaviour on the micro level
(Sutherland 1983, Sutherland and Cressey 1966, Cohen, Lindesmith and Schuessler 1956). In
his theory of differential learning he points out that criminal behaviour is learned behaviour.
Criminal behaviour is learned in interactions with persons who show criminal behaviour. But
the contact with these persons is not the crucial point. It is the contact with the deviant
behaviour itself, the observation of the techniques and the motives that leads people to learn
deviant behaviour from others. Sutherland assumes that a majority of contacts with deviant
behaviour leads a person to learn and finally show deviant behaviour (this is a very simple
assumption which was operationalized by Opp (1974: 165)).
5.5
First experiments have shown that there is a serious problem that has to be overcome before the
dynamic model will succed. In contrast to the cellular worlds of Hegselmann and Flache (1998) and
Nowak and Lewenstein (1996), in the Conte and Castelfranchi model grid positions not only
represent social locations, but also geographical ones. The clustering which has proved to be a
precondition for the survival of minority groups is not possible in a world with randomly distributed
food. Thus, learning almost always results in equilibrium states where one group has been
extinguished. This problem has to be solved before dynamic MAS will be as successful as game
theoretic models in simulating normative and deviant behaviour of different subpopulatons (Vila and
Cohen 1993).
5.6
Finally, we would like to encourage further experiments into norm-governed and norm-abiding
agents. From the computational point of view, the advantages of norm-governed systems are
avoiding useless, stupid, and self-destructive behaviour as favoured by the rigid execution of
routines, as well as the spreading of errors and deviations produced by pure imitation. Therefore, it
is promising to construct autonomous artificial agents with a capacity of applying norms. Like
Castelfranchi, Conte and Paolucci, we have investigated the costs of complying with norms, as
norm-governed systems not only have advantages, but also costs. From the computational point of
view, like the Conte and Castelfranchi model, even our model represents norm-abiding behaviour
using norms as built-in constraints. We should advance to more intelligent representations of
normative behaviour, with norms as built-in ends, or built-in obligations.

References
CASTELFRANCHI C, Conte R and Paolucci M (1998) Normative reputation and the costs of
compliance. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 1(3)
<http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/1/3/3.html>

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

18

25/08/2014

COHEN A K, Lindesmith A and Schuessler K Eds. (1956) The Sutherland Papers. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
CONTE R and Castelfranchi C (1995a) Understanding the functions of norms in social groups
through simulation. In Gilbert N and Conte R (Eds.) Artificial Societies. The Computer Simulation
of Social Life. London: UCL Press. pp. 252-267.
CONTE, R and Castelfranchi C (1995b) Cognitive and social action. London: UCL Press. pp. 74118.
CONTE R and Castelfranchi C (1993) Norms as mental objects: From normative beliefs to
normative goals.In Proceedings of MAAMAW'93. Neuchatel: Switzerland.
DAHRENDORF R (1962) On the Origin of Social Inequality. In Laslett P and Runciman W G
(Eds.) Philosophy, Politics, and Society. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
DURKHEIM E (1965 [1895] Regeln der soziologischen Methode. 2nd edition. Neuwied:
Luchterhand.
DURKHEIM E (1966 [1893)] The division of labour in society. 3rd edition. New York: Free Press
GARFINKEL H (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
GEIGER T (1962) Arbeiten zur Soziologie. Neuwied: Luchterhand.
HAFERKAMP H (1972) Kriminalitt ist normal. Stuttgart: Enke.
HAFERKAMP H (1976) Soziologie als Handlungstheorie. 3rd edition. Opladen: Westdt. Verlag.
HAFERKAMP H (1980) Herrschaft und Strafrecht. Opladen: Westdt. Verlag.
HAFERKAMP H (1984) Herrschaftsverlust und Sanktionsverzicht. Kritische Bemerkungen zur
Theorie des starken Staates, der neuen sozialen Kontrolle und des ideellen Abolitionismus.
Kriminologisches Journal 15. pp. 112-131.
HAFERKAMP H (1987) Zur knftigen Neuorientierung der kriminologischen Forschung.
Kriminologisches Journal 18. pp. 171-192.
HART H L A (1961) The concept of law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
HEGSELMANN R, and Flache A (1998) Understanding complex social dynamics. A plea for
cellular automata based modelling. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 1(3)
<http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/1/3/1.html>
KOHLBERG L (1969) Stage and Sequence: The cognitive development approach to socializatiion.
In Goslin D A (Ed.) Handbook of socialization theory and research. Chicago: Rand McNelly
College Publishing Co.
KOHLBERG L (1971) From is to ought. In Mischel Th (Ed.) Cognitive development and
epistemology. New York: Academic Press.
LEWIS D (1969) Convention. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
MARX K (1936) Capital, a critique of political economy. The process of capitalist production,
translated from the third German edition by S Moore and E Aveling. Edited by F Engels, revised
http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

19

25/08/2014

and amplified according to the fourt German edition by E Untermann. New York: The Modern
Library.
MERTON R K (1968) The Matthew effect in science. Science 159. pp. 56-63.
NONNER-WINKLER G (1984) Normen.In Kerber H and Schmieder A (Eds.). Handbuch
Soziologie. Zur Theorie und Praxis sozialer Beziehungen. Reinbek: Rowohlt. pp. 398-408.
NOWAK A and Lewenstein M (1996) Modeling social change with cellular automata. In
HEGSELMANN R, Mueller U and Troitzsch K G (Eds.) Modeling and Simulation in the Social
Sciences from the Philosophy of Science Point of View. Dordrecht, Kluwer: pp. 249-286.
OPP K-D (1974) Abweichendes Verhalten und Gesellschaftsstruktur. Darmstadt: Luchterhand.
PARSONS T (1964) The Social System. New York: Routledge & Paul.
SCHELLING T C (1960) The strategy of conflict. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SHERIF M (1967) Formation of social norms: The experimental paradigm. In Sherif M (1967)
Social Interaction. Chicago: Aldine.
SHOHAM Y and Tenneholtz M (1992a) On the synthesis of useful social laws for artificial agent
societies (preliminary report). In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference. pp. 276-281.
SHOHAM Y and Tenneholtz M (1992b) Emergent conventions in multi agent systems: Initial
experimental results and observations. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
KR&R. Cambridge, MA: pp. 225-232.
SUTHERLAND E H (1983 [1949]) White Collar Crime. The uncut version. New Haven: Yale Univ.
Press.
SUTHERLAND E H and D R Cressey (1966) Principles of Criminology. 7th edition. Philadelphia:
Lippincott.
ULLMAN-MARGALIT E (1977) The emergence of norms. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
VILA B J and Cohen L E (1993) Crime as Strategy. Testing an Evolutionary Ecological Theory of
Expropriate Crime. American Journal of Sociology 98. pp. 873-912.
WALKER A and M Wooldridge (1995) Understanding the emergence of conventions in multi-agent
systems. In Proceedings of ICMAS (International Joint Conference on Multi Agent Systems) San
Francisco.
WEBER M (1960) Soziologische Grundbegriffe. In Weber M (1960) Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft.
Tbingen: Mohr.
ZUCKERMAN H (1993) Die Werdegnge von Nobelpreistrgern. In Mayer K U (Ed.)
Generationsdynamik in der Forschung. Frankfurt: Campus. pp. 59-79.
Return to Contents of this issue
 Copyright Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 1998

http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/2/1/2.html

20

25/08/2014

