Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122
www.elsevier.com/locate/compenvurbsys

Social area analysis, data mining, and GIS
Seth E. Spielman a, Jean-Claude Thill b,*
b

a
Department of Geography, SUNY-Bualo, Bualo, NY, USA
Department of Geography and Earth Sciences, University of North Carolina  Charlotte, 9201 University City Blvd, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA

Received 17 July 2007; received in revised form 16 November 2007; accepted 19 November 2007

Abstract
There is a long cartographic tradition of describing cities through a focus on the characteristics of their residents. A review of the
history of this type of urban social analysis highlights some persistent challenges. In this paper existing geodemographic approaches
are extended through coupling the Kohonen Self-Organizing Map algorithm (SOM), a data-mining technique, with geographic information systems (GIS). This approach allows the construction of linked maps of social (attribute) and geographic space. This novel type of
geodemographic classication allows ad hoc hierarchical groupings and exploration of the relationship between social similarity and geographic proximity. It allows one to lter complex demographic datasets and is capable of highlighting general social patterns while
retaining the fundamental social ngerprints of a city. A dataset describing 79 attributes of the 2217 census tracts in New York City
is analyzed to illustrate the technique. Pairs of social and geographic maps are formally compared using simple pattern metrics. Our
analysis of New York City calls into question some assumptions about the functional form of spatial relationships that underlie many
modeling and statistical techniques.
 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Self-Organizing Maps; Geodemographics; New York City; Data mining; GIS

1. Introduction
In gearing up for the rst United States decennial census
in 1790, James Madison argued that the census should be
extended so as to embrace some other objects besides
the bare enumeration of the inhabitants; it would enable
them to adapt the public measures to the particular circumstances of the community (Kurland & Lerner, 1987, p.
139). Madisons idea, that knowing something about the
characteristics of local populations improves local governance is accepted as a basic premise in planning, politics,
and policy analysis. However how one understands the
particular circumstances of a community is a methodological question that has been evolving for over a century.
Madisons proposal to extend the census to include the
occupations of inhabitants was rejected by the United
*

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 704 687 5909; fax: +1 704 687 5966.
E-mail addresses: ses27@bualo.edu (S.E. Spielman), jfthill@uncc.edu
(J.-C. Thill).
0198-9715/$ - see front matter  2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2007.11.004

States Senate in 1790. In a letter to Jeerson, Madison
reected that his plan was thrown out by the Senate as a
waste of trouble and supplying materials for idle people
to make a book (Cohen, 1981, p. 47). Unlike in Madisons
day, data about cities and the people who live in them is
now abundant; in fact data are so abundant and complex
that integrating available information into the public planning processes is often dicult. The rst census asked ve
questions; the long form of the questionnaire for the 2000
decennial census of population was 10 pages long and
included over 50 questions. Many municipalities now maintain detailed datasets describing crime, trac, school performance, the built environment, and many other facets
of urban life. The volume of data currently available to
planners is excellent fodder for urban scholars. Yet, it
remains a challenge to communicate the complexity of the
urban social landscape in an engaging and ecient manner.
In addition to a dramatic increase in the volume of
information, new forms of analysis that emphasize an
exploratory approach and are based on computational

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

principles have become commonplace. Data mining is the
extraction of implicit, previously unknown, and potentially
useful information from data (Witten & Frank, 2005, p.
xxiii). Machine learning techniques of data mining, while
still seldom used in urban analysis, have the potential to
help analysts develop detailed dierentiation of the urban
landscape. In contrast to more conventional multivariate
statistical methods such as factor analysis, principal component analysis, and multidimensional scaling, they tend
to be less bound by a priori assumptions. Geographic
Information Systems, on the other hand, are widely used
in urban analysis because they facilitate cartographic visualization and management of geographically referenced
data.
Our goal in this paper is to revisit the problem of
describing communities through a focus on the characteristics of residents. The history of residential segregation by
race and income in America has supported the use of very
general colloquial descriptions of neighborhoods that focus
almost exclusively on combinations of these two factors.
We present a novel application of geographic information
systems by integrating them with a data-mining technique
to characterize populations in urban areas using large
datasets. The Kohonen Self-Organizing Map algorithm
(Kohonen, 1997) is used to develop a geodemographic classication of a dataset containing 79 attributes describing
census tracts in New York City. The Self-Organizing
Map extends current geodemographic practice by allowing
the formalization of spatial relationships between physical
(geographic) space and social (attribute) space. The result
is a typology of census tracts presented as a pair of linked
maps  one representing social space and another representing geographic space. These maps capture the complexity of New Yorks social landscape and provide insight into
the relationship between geographic proximity and social
similarity at the census tract level. The relationship between
proximity and similarity has potentially important implications for modeling and statistical techniques that drawing
on Toblers (1970) First Law of Geography make assumptions about the functional form of spatial relationships.
2. Maps and Neighborhood Typologies
Since the turn of the previous century, advocates and
social scientists have been mapping the socioeconomic variation in cities through looking at residential patterns.
Charles Booths poverty maps of London are a classic
eort to map this social landscape. Booth, working
between 1886 and 1903, classied Londons streets as using
seven categories: wealthy, well-to-do, fairly comfortable,
mixed, poor, very poor, and vicious, semi-criminal (Booth,
1902).
In spite of the abundance and complexity of spatial data
describing the US population in the planning and policy
context, one often nds that we have not moved very far
beyond Booths classication system. Neighborhoods are
often dierentiated using just a few attributes  the income,

111

race, and occupation of inhabitants and the density of the
built environment. Descriptive terms like working class
suburbs and poor inner city evoke images of prototypical neighborhoods. Among the residents of a given city,
neighborhood names are often signiers of subtle dierentiations in social and physical landscape. These subtle distinctions are often hard to communicate to non-residents
and may not be commonly understood by residents.
In the modern context, the most sophisticated eorts to
classify populations are known as geodemographic or market segmentation systems. Geodemographic systems classify small areas into discrete categories using consumer
behavior, lifestyle, and demographic data. These tools are
widely used in the commercial sector and multivariate
social classications of neighborhoods has become an
international industry (Harris, Sleight, & Webber, 2005;
Longley & Clarke, 1995). Unfortunately, since market segmentation is a competitive, commercial enterprise, the specics of the methods and data used in the construction of
these proprietary systems is often obscure.
As described by Harris et al. (2005), the geodemographic
approach is essentially a data reduction technique. A standard methodology involves using a weighted k-means algorithm to develop initial clusters. Census administrative
districts (rows) are weighted by their residential population
and variables (columns) are weighted by the analyst according to their perceived importance or to minimize correlation
eects. K-means is a simple type of cluster analysis where
the user chooses a desired number of clusters, k, and then
observations are assigned to clusters based on their proximity to the cluster means. The initial cluster centers can be
randomly assigned by the algorithm or manually specied,
the initial centers may have a signicant eect on the resulting classication. The procedure is iterative and generally
ends once the clusters become stable. In the approach outlined by Harris et al. (2005), areas are weighted based on
their population and variables are weighted based upon
how important the variable is in distinguishing dierent
types of consumers. The result is that each neighborhood
(usually treated as some type of census or administrative
area) is assigned to one and only one of a predetermined
number of clusters representing similar types of neighborhoods. Some geodemographers (Feng & Flowerdew, 1998,
1999) have also successfully experimented with fuzzy clustering techniques, in which each neighborhood belongs to
varying degrees to each of the clusters.
In the private sector geodemographers then assign evocative titles to each cluster. Names like American Dreams
and Multi-Culti Mosaic are used by the PRIZM lifestyle
segmentation system in the United States (Curry, 1993;
Weiss, 1989). These clusters are described with pen pictures, short one-paragraph descriptions of the discriminating characteristics of each cluster. The user interacts
with the system through the category titles. Commercial
geodemographic systems divide the national population
into discrete classes based on variables useful for describing
consumption patterns; they are tools primarily designed for

112

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

dierentiating between dierent categories of rich people
(Webber, 2004, p. 220). This is an interesting contrast to
Charles Booth who was interested in dierentiating dierent classes of poor people (worthy vs. unworthy poor)
(Ward, 1990). The bias toward descriptions of specic
sub-populations is not inherent in geodemographic analysis
and is absent from the UK Oce of National Statistics
geodemographic classication of census output areas. The
2001 output area classication simply (or not so simply)
aims to describe the entire population of the UK using a
hierarchical classication that has 52 groups at the lowest
level and 7 at the coarsest level of aggregation. This classication avoids the use of cluster labels and instead uses
numbers to label classes. Pen pictures are matter of fact
summaries of the distinguishing elements of each cluster.
The variables used in this analysis are selections from
Key Statistics Tables for the 2001 census of the UK (Vickers, Rees, & Birkin, 2005).
Batey and Brown (1995) and Harris et al. (2005) see
modern geodemographic systems as rooted in a conceptualization of neighborhood based on the human ecologic
approach of the Chicago School: geographical units distinguished by both physical individuality and by the social
and cultural characteristics of the population (Batey &
Brown, 1995, p. 78). The approach used by Booth and geodemographic systems, i.e., named categories, is not the only
way to develop multidimensional classications of urban
areas. Some of the earliest classications of census tracts
in the human ecologic tradition were done by Eshref Shevky in the 1940s in Los Angeles using seven variables and
over three hundred census tracts. Shevky created three
indices by computing percentiles for seven variables. The
rst index measured urbanization, the second measured
segregation, and the third measured social rank. Shevky
ranks places and then compares places to each other and to
the city-wide average. He also groups places that have similar ranking on each of the three dimensions. His 1949
book includes extensive tables reporting these results. Shevky hoped that by developing a typology of urban places
through a focus on local characteristics one could build a
more robust understanding of urban systems in industrialized societies (Shevky & Williams, 1972).
Shevkys early work on social area analysis was instrumental in the emergence of factorial ecology as a line
of inquiry. The term, factorial ecology, emerged in the
mid-60s and refers to the use of factor analysis to dierentiate areal (ecological) units using the characteristics of residents (Janson, 1980). Factorial ecologies most typically
describe the characteristics of urban areas through an analysis of census tracts, however, during the heyday of factorial ecology, factor analytic approaches were widely used to
describe patterns of areal dierentiation at various geographic scales (Berry, 1971; Rees, 1971; Johnston, 1976).
Factor analysis is a method to reduce a large matrix of
units of observation and their attributes to a smaller number of factors. Berry (1971) uses the following analogy to
describe the factor analytic approach (p. 215216):

If there are n areas and m variables, an n  m matrix is
used to list the manifest evidence. An atlas comprising m
plates could also depict the variations. Factorial methods
are brought into play to determine the latent structure of
dimensions of variation  the repetitive sequences  underlying the manifest experiences of the atlas.
The smaller matrix is a more concise description of the
economic and demographic variability of census tracts.
Factor scores are sometimes described as latent or fundamental variables. Interpretation of latent variables is a
matter of some debate, some use latent variables to explain
urban residential patterns (Ward, 1969) while others simply
saw them as concise descriptions of patterns (Rees, 1971, p.
221). The former view is particularly controversial.
In the explanatory mode factor scores are interpreted as
representations of theoretical constructs (Berry, 1971; Janson, 1980). Many independent analyses found that residential areas in Western industrialized cities, particularly those
in the United States, were dierentiated by three factors;
one describing racial and ethnic segregation, another
describing socioeconomic status, and a third describing
ones point in the lifecycle. This three-factor view is rooted
in Shevkys early analysis of Los Angeles and is known as
the ShevkyBell hypothesis (Janson, 1980). While factor
analysis is not a conrmatory statistical technique, the fact
that some form of the ShevkyBell factor structure
emerged from many urban analyses was seen as support
for this view of urban spatial structure. Palm and Caruso
(1972) saw this argument as a form of speculative synthesis. A factor consists of many variables, each one weighted
dierently. Palm and Caruso argue that the labels used to
describe factor scores generally focus on only a few of
the variables loaded on that particular factor (Palm & Caruso, 1972). Their indictment of factor analysis is extensive
and beyond the scope of this paper. For our purposes here,
it is interesting to note that their criticism of the crudeness
of classication in factor analysis could be extended both
to modern geodemographic systems and early geographic
studies of urban populations. Where factor analysis compresses a large number of variables into a smaller number
of factors geodemographic systems accomplish a similar
end by grouping a large number of observations into a
smaller number of groups. The speculative synthesis
enters factor analysis in determining the meaning of the
latent variables. The speculative enters geodemographic
analysis in determining appropriate weights and describing
the constituents of a group.
The goal of commercial and public sector geodemographic packages is to place local areas in some national
context based on the characteristics of residents, that is,
their primary purpose is descriptive generalization. As
national classications have proven useful for marketing
and are widely used as predictors of consumer behavior
(Webber, 1985), the authors do not wish to challenge the
utility of geodemographic systems. However, when one
looks at the history of eorts to map the socioeconomic
variation in cities certain themes emerge. Labeled catego-

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

ries have been used for over a hundred years to describe
urban populations in a multivariate sense. While the techniques have evolved and become more sophisticated, while
the volume and perhaps quality of the data has greatly
increased, the basic method of multivariate mapping has
not changed. For as long as such maps have been made,
labeled categories have been used. The principal limitation
of reliance on labeled (or numbered) categories is not the
labels per say but the problem of communicating the multidimensional complexity of the categories represented by
the labels.
The problem of assigning labels in the inductive, quantitative, analytical techniques that have been used since
Shevky is essentially a problem of designing an interface
to the classication system. In addition to labels, geodemographic systems often have a hierarchical structure which
allows the user to explore the classication with various
levels of detail. The UK 2001 output areas classication
was constructed by rst creating seven categories, and the
subdividing each of those categories further to create a nal
dataset with 7 high level categories, 21 mid level categories,
and 52 classes at the nest level of details (Vickers et al.,
2005). In the remainder of the paper we present a technique
for constructing topological relationships between geodemographic classes these topological relationships enable
the construction of a map of attribute space. The technique employed here allows one to avoid the use of labeled
categories, assess the multivariate similarity of classes, and
explore the relationship between geographic proximity and
social similarity. This latter characteristic gives the technique particular strength and it provides some new insights
into the assumptions underlying a number of urban spatial
analytical techniques.
3. Self-Organizing Maps
Maps preserve topological relationships among objects
in space. In the cartographic context, entities and features
that are close to each other in the real world are represented close to each other on a map. There is evidence to
suggest that the ability to situate oneself on a map is an
innate human ability (Holden, 2006). This makes maps useful tools for describing the environment and presenting
data. Maps are frequently used to present information
about urban areas. Traditional cartographic maps are limited in that they can only paint a one-dimensional picture
of the social characteristics of an area. While maps are
an ecient and familiar medium, they have limitations
when it comes to displaying multiple pieces of information
about the same location.
The concept of a map can also be applied to non-geographic objects; or it can be used to visualize geographic
objects (census tracts) in a spatial but non-geographic context. That is, census tracts can be organized in space based
upon the similarity of their characteristics rather than their
geographic proximity. This is the basic idea behind the
Kohonen algorithm that creates Self-Organizing Maps

113

(SOMs) that maps observations with similar attribute patterns onto contiguous areas in output space. The resulting
visualizations are called self-organizing feature maps
(Kohonen, 1997). The idea is simple: observations (vectors)
that are similar are mapped to proximate regions of a twodimensional synthetic space of xed topology. SOMs are a
type of unsupervised articial neural network. Neural networks use the concept of a neuron to analyze data. Neurons are organized in layers and connected. Neurons
respond to a stimulus (data) by transforming the data,
themselves, or other neurons. In the approach outlined by
Kohonen (1997) and used here, a single output layer of neurons is trained such that regions of this layer are sensitized
to observations with specic types of attribute vectors.
SOM outputs are attribute maps. Unlike thematic maps,
SOM feature maps excel at the display of high dimensional
datasets. Feature maps are a projection of high dimensional attribute space such that attribute vectors of a particular generalized form are associated with locations in
output space (Skupin and Agarwal, 2008; Skupin & Fabrikant, 2003). As a data reduction method, a SOM cuts
down the number of rows and columns of a data matrix;
the method is a combination of data projection and data
quantization (Yan & Thill, 2008). With a self-organizing
feature map, a map-reader can judge the similarity or dissimilarity of objects based on their proximity. The
approach shares some characteristics with multidimensional scaling, regression, and cluster analysis. The process
of tting observations to a SOM is an iterative and stochastic process dependent upon a random map initialization.
For details on specifying and training a SOM see Bacao,
Lobo, & Painho (2008), Kohonen (1997), Kohonen,
Hynninen, Kangas, and Laaksonen (1996), Openshaw
(1989), and others. This paper will only describe the details
relevant to the interpretation of SOMs.
Space in a SOM consists of a regular lattice of neurons each of which stores a vector describing attribute
weights. The elements of the lattice generally are square
or hexagonal. Through the SOM mapping process, each
neuron in the output layer is sensitized to a particular conguration of attributes and observations are t to neurons much as a regression model is t to data. It is useful
to think of the neurons on the feature map as buckets for
data. Observations that are similar are placed either in
the same bucket or in buckets that are topologically close
to one another on the feature map. For example, places
with many wealthy householders, with high levels of education, high homeownership rates, and low poverty rates
would end up in buckets that are near each other and clustered in a region of the feature map. On the other hand,
census tracts where poverty is abundant and residents typically have low levels of education would end up clustered
in buckets in a dierent region of the SOM; probably quite
far away from the well educated and wealthy people. Places
that have both wealthy households and poor households
would end up occupying a region of the map somewhere
between the two extremes. Training a SOM is an iterative

114

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

process of dening what types of observations are associated with buckets in dierent regions of the feature map.
By examining the contents of each bucket after the SOM
is completely trained, one can get a sense of how dierent
regions of the SOM represent dierent types of
observations.
SOM feature maps of dierent sizes have dierent characteristics (Skupin & Agarwal, 2008). Small feature maps
provide generalizations; large grids allow a unique location
in geographic space to be mapped to a unique location in
the synthetic attribute space. In a large feature map, where
the number of buckets exceeds the number of observations,
each bucket may hold few, if any observations; regions
have very specic properties. On the contrary, in a small
SOM feature map where the number of observations far
exceeds the number of buckets, many observations will fall
into each bucket and regions of the map will represent general characteristics (Fig. 1). The size of the SOM feature
map is specied by the user a priori.
Relatively few geographic applications of SOM have so
far been reported in the literature. The SOM has successfully been trained to classify digital satellite images (Villmann, Merenyi, & Hammer, 2003; and many others). In
all these works, SOM is used as an unsupervised classier,
working on the multi-spectral information in satellite
images. Openshaw and Wymer (1995) tested an application
of the SOM algorithm against a K-means classication on
census data in the United Kingdom and found it to perform very well. Skupin and Hagelman (2003) use the
SOM method to study patterns of change in the socioeconomic prole of census tracts. Outside the application of
SOM to satellite imagery or census data, a handful of studies of geographic feature identication have been conducted with the SOM method. An early case study by
Kaski and Kohonen (1996) applied SOM to a data set of
39 welfare statistical indicators of countries. Himanen,
Jarvi-Nykanen, and Raitio (1998) explored the applicability of SOM in identifying daily travel patterns in a disaggregate travel diary data set. Thill, Kretzschmar, Casas,
and Yao (2008) analyze ill-conditioned linguistic data on
the Atlantic Seaboard of North America in relation to
geography. Yan and Thill (2008) developed an interactive
visual data-mining environment to explore patterns in a
multidimensional database of air travel ows. Kauko
30 objects

(2005) studied spatial housing markets, and Hatzichristos
(2004) applied SOM to a regional classication of Athens,
Greece.
Skupin and Hagelman (2003, 2005) used large grids to
explore the demographic trajectories of dierent regions
of Texas. In this context, a large grid separates similar
regions into unique areas on the feature map. In this work,
a SOM is trained on 30 years of census data. The large feature map allowed them to examine how the characteristics
of census tracts changed over time by looking at how individual tracts moved around the output space over time.
Medium sized grids are a compromise; they allow regions
with clearly identiable characteristics to form on the
map, yet general statements can be made about these
regions as they contain a fair number of census tracts  this
is the approach used in the next section.
The Kohonen Self-Organizing Map algorithm extends
geodemographics, and similar cluster-like methods by constructing topological relationships between classes (Kohonen, 1997). Geodemographic classications group areas
with similar characteristics and apply descriptive labels to
these classications. One of the problems with such classications is that groups are discrete. It is not clear how similar or dissimilar classes are in a multivariate sense because
classes are typically described by comparison to regional or
national averages. By constructing topological relationships between classes, the Kohonen algorithm allows the
user to understand the degree of similarity or dissimilarity
between areas based upon their location in a two dimensional projection of multidimensional attribute space.
To explore the ecacy of SOMs and geovisualization as
a geodemographic tool, a dataset with 79 variables is used
to describe census tracts in New York City. The variables
used in the analysis are listed in the Appendix. Variables
from the 2000 decennial census were chosen to represent
some aspect of New Yorks social geography. Census tracts
are mapped onto a 45  30 cell map of social space consisting of 1350 buckets (neurons) for 2217 census tracts.
Buckets can be interpreted as classes or clusters of similar
data. The topological relationships built by the Kohonen
algorithm allow the user to examine any number of buckets
or classes  selecting a single bucket would be akin to
exploring a single geodemographic class at the highest level
of disaggregation, selecting groups of contiguous cells

Small SOM (7 Cells)

Each cell contains approximately 4 observtions
on average. It is a more general categorization
than the larger SOM below.
Large SOM (24 Cells)

Each cell contains just over 1 observation
on average. Regions of the SOM are
more specialized.

Fig. 1. Self-Organizing Map Size.

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

would be parallel to exploring a geodemographic classication at a higher level aggregation. With an integrated visual
data-mining approach, we avoid the use of category labels.
Since our approach is visual, we can dene a very large
number of categories and still present our results in a
way that is easy to interpret. Pairing the synthetic map of
attribute space with a geographic map of census allows
the user to explore how groups of tracts in attribute space
map to geographic space, and vice versa. The comparison
of map pairs can be simplied and standardized through
the use of a statistic to compare map patterns.
A simple scaled measure of the average distance between
observational units was developed to compare maps of
social space to maps of geographic space. To compare
maps, we compute the average distance between all pairs
of census tracts and all pairs of SOM buckets (neurons)
that satisfy some pre-specied criteria (cases). For both
maps the distance between cases is compared to the average
distance between all observational units to obtain a relative
measure of dispersion. This relative dispersion index is formulated as
P P
d ij =N cases
icase jcase
P P
d ij =N all
iall jall

where dij is the Euclidean distance between observations i
and j. Small numbers indicate that neurons or census tracts
satisfying a given criteria form compact regions, while large
numbers indicate that the units of interest are further apart
than average. The correspondence of dispersion statistics
between map pairs allows one to assess the relationship between geographic proximity and social similarity.
4. Mapping New York City
New York City is an ideal subject for testing for spatial
demographic methods. New York is home to what may be
the most racially and ethnically diverse zip code in the United States, 11373 in Elmhurst (a neighborhood in Queens
County) where the local high school has students from 96
dierent nations and 59 languages are spoken (Utley,
March 17, 2001). New York also has neighborhoods with
clearly identiable ethnic identities. New York has welldened high-income areas. Some of the wealthiest parts
of the United States are in the city, yet the Bronx is the
poorest urban county in the nation. This combination of
diversity and residential segregation make simple low
dimensional classications of New Yorks neighborhoods
dicult. The complexity and richness of New Yorks social
landscape make it ideally suited to exploration through
data-mining techniques and geovisualization tools.
The SOMPAK code library was used and a SOM was
trained using random selection of 50% of the census tracts
(Kohonen et al., 1996). Parameterization of each step has a
large eect on the resultant trained map. Training a SOM is
more akin to an art than to a science, hence the widely held

115

view that SOMs, like other data-mining techniques, are
black boxes (Miller & Han, 2001). We chose suitable
SOM parameters through trial and error. The nal map
was selected through an iterative process whereby we initialized 100 SOMs using random numbers and trained each
SOM by presenting 100,000 census tracts (the training
dataset was sampled with replacement). The map with
the lowest mean square error was retained for analysis.
This training period is computationally intensive and took
8 run-time hours on a desktop computer with an AMD
Athalon XP 3200 processor and 1GB of RAM. The
SOM output was imported into ESRI ArcGIS 9.1 software
using a Python script. Using the ESRI geodatabase le format, a relational (one to many) link was established
between the self-organizing feature map and a geographic
map of New York City by census tracts.
There are a number of dierent ways to summarize a
SOM. Traditionally, component planes and the unied distance matrix (or U-matrix) are utilized. The U-matrix is a
visualization of the SOM that illustrates the distance
between adjacent neurons in attribute space (the U-matrix
for the SOM described below is shown in Fig. 2). Observations that have similar proles on input variables are
mapped to nearby areas, however, distance in the synthetic
space of the SOM is not constant. Some pairs of proximate
buckets may hold observations that are more similar than
other pairs of proximate buckets. The synthetic space of
the SOM has hills and troughs which can increase surface
distance between pairs of proximate neurons. The Umatrix shows the distance, or dissimilarity, between the
vectors describing adjacent neurons, it illustrates cluster
structures evidenced by troughs and hills in the distance surface. The U-matrix provides little insight on the
meaning of the observed structures. In Fig. 2 the darker
the cell the more dissimilar it is to its neighbors. Each
bucket in the SOM has a unique value for each of the 79
attributes in the data set. A component plane uses color
to represent the weight assigned to a single input variable
at each neuron. Therefore, inspection of each of the 79
component planes would in principle allow a user to gure
out the exact characteristics of each neuron. This approach

Unified Distance Matrix

Fig. 2. Unied Distance Matrix.

116

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

however holds little advantage over an atlas displaying the
same data.
An alternative approach is to work backwards, that is
by selecting a census tract or group of tracts with known
characteristics and examining where they fall on the
SOM feature map. One can then use knowledge of the city
under study to explore the geography of the SOM feature
map. By selecting an area of interest one can examine
how it maps onto the SOM feature map. Reversing the
process, selecting all tracts that fall into the same buckets
as the area of interest, lets one quickly visualize parts of
the city that are similar to the area of interest in a multivariate sense. Fig. 3 illustrates the latter approach to SOMbased urban social geography. The census tracts in Manhattans Community Board 8 (an administrative unit that
Community Board 8

Community Board 8 Feature Map

Tracts In The Same Class As Community Board 8
Fig. 3. Linking Attribute and Geographic Maps.

has a role in governance) are selected in this gure. The
32 tracts that make up Community Board 8 map to a relatively well-dened region of the SOM feature map illustrating that Community Board 8 is a (relatively) socially
homogenous political unit. Community Board 8 is one of
the most auent in the city encompassing areas to the east
of the southern half of Central Park in Manhattan. Most of
the 32 tracts are mapped to 26 neurons bundled together in
the upper right region of the SOM feature map. However,
two or three outliers are visible. Those outliers correspond
to census tracts in Community Board 8 that contain public
housing developments. The rightmost of the three outliers
is a tract that contains a development for low income
senior citizens. The two furthest outliers each contain large,
high-rise, low income housing projects (Isaacs Towers and
John Haynes Holmes Towers). Given their discordant
socioeconomic proles, these tracts sensitize distant parts
of the SOM feature map, in spite of their close geographic
proximity to the rest of Community Board 8. The third
image in the sequence illustrates the return to the geographic map, where twelve additional census tracts that
are similar, i.e., occupying the same part of the SOM, to
those in Community Board 8 are identied. Most of these
new tracts are geographically close to Community Board 8.
The process shows that tracts with many similarities to
those in Community Board 8 are generally close to it 
auent census tracts are birds of a feather. This visual
interpretation is supported by the relative dispersion statistic for the social space map. The score of 0.39 indicates that
the classes representing the geographically contiguous community board 8 are also clustered in attribute space. In general one nds that the very auent parts of the city, for
example, those tracts in the top 1% for income, are less
diverse and more geographically concentrated than the
lower income parts of the city (Table 1).
The analysis of Community Board 8 suggests that upper
right corner of the SOM feature map represents the more
auent portions of the city (Fig. 4). Selecting the neurons
in the extreme upper right yields a geographic map that

Table 1
Relative dispersions in geographic space and in attribute space
Criteria

Relative census tract
dispersion

Relative neuron
dispersion

Comparison of relative dispersions
(census tract dispersion/neuron
dispersion)

Manhattan Community Board 8 (Fig. 3)
Brooklyn Community Board 6
Top quartile for median household income
Bottom quartile for median household income
Top decile for median household income
Bottom decile for median household income
Top 1% for median household income
Bottom 1% for median household income
Upper Right Corner of the SOM (Fig. 4)
Lower left corner of the SOM (Fig. 5)
90% Minority (Fig. 6)
90% AfricanAmerican
90% Caucasian

0.09
0.12
1.14
0.87
1.05
0.87
0.61
0.91
0.53
0.84
0.79
0.67
1.11

0.39
0.68
1.03
0.96
0.99
0.99
0.64
0.87
0.26
0.26
0.77
0.60
0.99

0.23
0.17
1.12
0.91
1.06
0.88
0.97
1.05
2.04
3.23
1.03
1.12
1.12

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

includes some of the more auent parts of the city (including portions of the West Village, Chelsea, the Upper East
and West sides, Forest Hills, Park Slope, Brooklyn
Heights, and Riverdale). The portion of the SOM that is
most distant from the upper right in the attribute space,
the lower left, corresponds with tracts in northern Manhattan, Harlem, and the Bronx (Fig. 5). The extreme lower left
contains census tracts where over 50% of the population
lives in poverty (as dened in the 2000 census). The tracts
of the lower left do not group into as clearly dened areas
as those in the upper right. This suggests that these parts of
the city that are most dissimilar to the auent parts of the
city exhibit less clustering than auent areas, or stated

117

more crudely, poor people are less clustered than rich people. In this example places with similar levels of attribute
clustering show dierent levels of geographic clustering.
This nding is again borne out by the dispersion statistics.
The areas represented by the upper right are more geographically clustered than the lower left, 0.53 for the upper
right versus 0.84 for the lower left (see Table 1). This observation should be tempered by the U-matrix (Fig. 2) which
shows some dierences between the upper right and lower
left corners of the SOM.
Selecting large contiguous regions of the SOM as
shown in Figs. 4 and 5 allows the user to explore the
geodemographic classication created by the Kohonen algo-

Census tracts in the upper right corner of the SOM

Fig. 4. Census Tracts in the Upper Right Corner of the SOM.

118

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

Census tracts in the lower left corner of the SOM

Fig. 5. Census Tracts in the Lower Left Corner of the SOM.

rithm at dierent levels of detail, similar to a hierarchical
cluster analysis. Since proximity in the synthetic space of
the SOM equates to similarity, selecting groups of proximal
neurons (buckets) allows the user to slice the dataset at a
level of aggregation that suits their particular purpose. The
ability to create ad hoc hierarchical grouping makes the
SOM-based approach to geodemographic analysis particularly exible.
Another approach to exploring and interpreting the
trained SOM feature map is to select an area based on a
single criterion, say census tracts where more than 90%
of residents are not caucasian, Fig. 6 identies census
tracts that meet this particular criterion. Using the SOM

feature map, we can nd places that belong to the same
classes as places where more than 90% of residents are
not caucasian (tracts mapped to the same neurons) thus
highlighting areas that are similar. In the case of New
York City, Fig. 6 indicates that the latter areas are adjacent to zones satisfying the 90% non-caucasian criteria.
The geographic pattern of places with a large non-caucasian population is very similar to the pattern of these census tracts on the Self-Organizing Map, there is a close link
between the distribution of these tracts in geographic and
attribute space. Again the relative dispersion statistics in
Table 1 support this nding: the geographic and the
Self-Organizing Maps have almost identical dispersion

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

119

Census tracts where more than 90% of residents
are not caucasian

Census tracts that map to the same regions of the
feature map as those places where more than 90%
of residents are not caucasian
Fig. 6. Using Attribute Map to Select Similar Regions.

scores (0.79 and 0.77, respectively). This approach paints a
richer picture of the city; instead of using a single criterion
to identify similar places, we can now nd areas of the city
that are similar in many respects.

5. Conclusions
Representing the complexity of urban populations
through cartography has been an area of inquiry since
the 1890s. As data became more abundant and statistical
techniques more rened, social area analysis and then factor analysis emerged. Modern geodemographic techniques
have their roots in the analytic framework of the Chicago
School and the methods pioneered by Eshref Shevky. Fac-

tor analysis and geodemographic techniques are limited in
that when classications use large high-dimensional datasets it is dicult to assess the multidimensional similarity/dierence between classes. Factorial ecology and
geodemographics have been critiqued for their use of labels
(Goss, 1995; Palm & Caruso, 1972). Self-Organizing Maps
belong to a new class of approaches to the problem of
describing urban populations. They are noteworthy in that
when combined with geographic information systems they
allow one to lter the complex demographic reality of New
York City and are capable of highlighting general social
patterns while retaining the fundamental social ngerprints
of the city.
One of the precepts of the human-ecologic approach
that underlies geodemographics and urban factorial ecol-

120

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

ogy is that populations sort themselves geographically to
form socioeconomically dierentiated areal units or neighborhoods (Park & Burgess, 1925; Robson, 1969). This
framework is important to the interpretation of census
reporting districts. The SOM method is a powerful tool
to extract high-level structures of groupings of census
tracts in the multidimensional attribute space. The comparison of patterns or structures in geographic space
and attribute space is of interest as it sheds light onto
the basic hypothesis of the human-ecologic approach to
urban analysis.
Our analysis of New York City provides insight into
Toblers First Law of Geography which states that proximal things are more similar than distal things. This law
seems not to hold when the things of interest are the census tracts of New York City. We nd that things which are
often quite similar, that project to same region of the SOM
map, are often in very dierent sections of the city. Welldened, compact geographic regions are often composed
of neighborhoods that are widely distributed in attribute
space; as an example, Brooklyns Community Board 6 is
a geographically dened compact region comprised of census tracts that map to many regions of the attribute space
(Table 1). The First Law has important implications for
spatial analytical techniques where buers, kernels, or
weights matrices are used in estimation or to treat the environment endogenously. It is important to understand that
in a multidimensional sense, the assumption of proximity
equating to similarity does not hold at the census tract
level, in New York City. Whether and to what extent this
may also be the case in other metropolitan areas remains
to be established through case studies across a representative sample of metropolitan areas.
Self-Organizing Maps share many of the limitations of
factor analysis and geodemographic clustering techniques.
When these techniques are applied to census divisions they
must be interpreted with caution. Any analysis of census
tracts in an urban area raises important questions about
the nature of tracts. Are tracts a meaningful unit of analysis? An analysis of census tracts is not an analysis of people
and one must be careful to limit inference to scale of observation  any statements in this paper are about groups, not
individuals. How important is the variability of populations within a tract to the overall classication scheme that
results from a particular analytical approach?
The ability to visualize SOMs using commercial geographic information systems is limited. Interfaces between
the SOM data-mining method and GIS are not widely
available however with lots of pointing and clicking or
some simple scripting the connections can be made. Customized tools for the visualization of Self-Organizing
Maps in a geovisualization context are quickly becoming
available (Guo, Chen, MacEachren, & Liao, 2006; Takatsuka, 2001; Thill et al., 2008; Yan & Thill, forthcoming,
in press).
Finally, one of the most important aspects of using
Self-Organizing Maps in demographic analysis is variable

selection. The absence of suitable theory to guide variable selection is a troubling reality; there is no current
analogue to the ShevkyBell hypothesis. Absent theoretical guidance the best a researcher can do is choose variables deemed important to the problem at hand. SOMs
are an exploratory technique and as such are not useful
for conrming theory. Nor are SOMs easily integrated
into traditional statistical modeling techniques. While
SOMs are subject to criticism because of their inability
to extend urban theory, when used in the exploratory
mode they provide insight into the residential population
of a city and can shed light on some of the assumptions
underlying many urban analytical techniques such as
the relationship between proximity and similarity. In
sum linking the Kohonen Algorithm with GIS helps in
understanding the particular circumstances of the
community.
Appendix. Socio-economic variables
SQMILES
POP100
HU100
POPDENS
MALE_TOT
FEM_TOT
USCHLAGE
SCHLAGE
MELDR_65
FELDR_65
ELDR_65
PCT_USCA
PCT_SCHA
PCT_ELDR
PCT_FEM
ENGLISH
SPANISH
CHINESE
RUSSIAN
ITALIAN
PCT_FORLAN
PCT_NATIVE
HU_OCC

Area in square miles
Total population
Total housing units
Population density (POP100/
SQMILES)
Total male population
Total female population
Population under school age, under 5
years
School age population, 517 years
Elderly male population, 65 years and
over
Elderly female population, 65 years
and over
Elderly population, 65 years and over
Percent of population under school
age, under 5 years
Percent of school age population, 517
years
Percent elderly population, 65 years
and over
Percent female population
English spoken at home, 5 years and
over
Spanish spoken at home, 5 years and
over
Chinese spoken at home, 5 years and
over
Russian spoken at home, 5 years and
over
Italian spoken at home, 5 years and
over
Percent foreign language spoken at
home, 5 years and over
Percent native born
Occupied housing units

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

HU_VAC
HU_OWN
HU_RENT
PCT_VACT
PCT_OWOC

Vacant housing units
Owner occupied housing units
Renter occupied housing units
Percent vacant housing units
Percent owner occupied housing
units
MEDMOVED
Median year householder moved into
housing unit
SAME1995
Population in same house in 1995
MEDRENT
Median contract rent quartile in
dollars
PCTINCOME
Median gross rent as percent of
household income in dollars
YRBUILT
Median year structure built
MEDVALUEOO Median value for owner occupied
housing units
HH_TOT
Total households reported
HH_POP
Total population in households
HH_AV_SZ
Average household size
HH_1PER
One person households
HH_FAM
Two or more person family households
HH_CH
Households with one or more people
under 18 years
PCT_HHCH
Percent households with children
PCT_ALONE
Percent living alone
PCT_FAM
Percent in families
PCT_FHHH
Percent single female head of
households
PCT_SMOM
Percent single mothers
TOT_FAM
Total families
POP_FAM
Total population in families
FAM_SIZE
Average family size
PCT_MARR
Percent of families married
PCT_MWC
Percent of families married with
children
MED_HHI
Median household income
PERCAPITA
Per capita income in 1999
MEDINCOME
Total median earnings in 1999
PCT_POVERT
Percent below poverty level
PCT_UNEMP
Percent of workforce unemployed
PCT_DRIVE
Percent of workers driving to work
PCT_CAR
Percent of occupied housing units with
vehicle available
PCT_PUB
Percent enrolled in public school
(grades Pre-K to 12)
PCT_GRAD
Percent high school graduates, 25 years
and over
WHITE
Number who self identify as only white
(White alone)
BLACK
Black or African American alone
NATAMER
American Indian and Alaska Native
alone
ASIAN
Asian alone
PACISLAND
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacic
Islander alone

OTHER
MULTIRACE
HISPANIC
NONHISP
ONE_NH
WHITE_NH
BLACK_NH
NATAM_NH
ASIAN_NH
PACIS_NH
OTHER_NH
MULTI_NH
PCT_HISP
PCT_WHITE
PCT_MINOR

121

Some other race alone
Two or more races
Hispanic or Latino
Non-hispanic
One race, non-hispanic
White alone, non-hispanic
Black or African American alone, nonhispanic
American Indian and Alaska Native
alone, non-hispanic
Asian alone, non-hispanic
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacic
Islander alone, non-hispanic
Some other race alone, non-hispanic
Two or more races, non-hispanic
Percent Hispanic (HISPANIC/
POP100)
Percent White (WHITE/POP100)
Percent Minority (1-WHITE/POP100)

References
Bacao, F., Lobo, V., & Painho, M. (2008). Applications of dierent selforganising map variants to geographical information science problems.
In P. Agarwal & A. Skupin (Eds.), Self-organising Maps: Applications
in Geographic Information Science. Chichester: Wiley.
Batey, P., & Brown, P. (1995). From human ecology to customer
targeting: The evolution of geodemographics. In P. Longley & G.
Clarke (Eds.), GIS for Business and Service Planning (pp. 77103).
Cambridge: GeoInformation International.
Berry, B. J. L. (1971). Introduction: The logic and limitations of
comparative factorial ecology. Economic Geography, 47(2), 209219.
Booth, C. (1902). Map Descriptive of London Poverty, 18989: London
School of Economics Charles Booth Online Archive.
Cohen, P. C. (1981). Statistics and the state: Changing social thought and
the emergence of a quantitative mentality in America, 1790 to 1820.
The William and Mary Quarterly, 38(1), 3555.
Curry, D. J. (1993). The New Marketing Research Systems. How to Use
Strategic Database Information for Better Marketing Decisions. New
York: Wiley.
Feng, Z., & Flowerdew, R. (1998). Fuzzy geodemographics: A contribution from fuzzy clustering methods. In S. Carver (Ed.), Innovations in
GIS 5 (pp. 119127). London: Taylor & Francis.
Feng, Z., & Flowerdew, R. (1999). The use of fuzzy classication to
improve geodemographic targeting. In B. Gittings (Ed.), Innovations in
GIS 6 (pp. 133144). London: Taylor & Francis.
Goss, J. (1995). We know who you are and we know where you live:
The instrumental rationality of geodemographic systems. Economic
Geography, 71(2), 171198.
Guo, D., Chen, J., MacEachren, A. M., & Liao, K. (2006). A visualization
system for spacetime and multivariate patterns (VIS-STAMP). IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(6),
14611474.
Harris, R., Sleight, P., & Webber, R. (2005). Geodemographics, GIS, and
Neighborhood Targeting. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Hatzichristos, T. (2004). Delineation of demographic regions with GIS
and computational intelligence. Environment and Planning B, 31,
3949.
Himanen, V., Jarvi-Nykanen, T., & Raitio, J. (1998). Daily travelling
viewed by self-organizing maps. In V. Himanen, P. Nijkamp, & A.
Reggiani (Eds.), Neural Networks in Transport Applications
(pp. 85110). Aldershot: Ashgate.

122

S.E. Spielman, J.-C. Thill / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32 (2008) 110122

Holden, C. (2006). Hunter-gatherers grasp geometry. Science, 311(5759),
317.
Janson, C.-G. (1980). Factorial social ecology: An attempt at summary
and evaluation. Annual Review of Sociology, 6, 433456.
Johnston, R. J. (1976). Residential area characteristics: Research methods
for identifying urban sub-areas  social area analysis and factorial
ecology. In D. T. Herbert & R. J. Johnston (Eds.), Social Areas in
Cities, Vol. I (pp. 193235). Chichester: Wiley.
Kaski, S., & Kohonen, T. (1996). Exploratory data analysis by the selforganizing map: Structures of welfare and poverty in the world. In
Apostolos-Paul N. Refenes, Y. Abu-Mostafa, J. Moody, & A.
Weigend (Eds.), Neural Networks in Financial Engineering
(pp. 498507). Singapore: World Scientic.
Kauko, T. (2005). Using the self-organising map to identify regularities
across country-specic housing-market contexts. Environment and
Planning B, 32, 89110.
Kohonen, T. (1997). Self-Organizing Maps. Berlin: Springer.
Kohonen, T., Hynninen, J., Kangas, J., & Laaksonen, J. (1996). The Self
Organizing Map Program Package (Version 3.1). Report A31.
Laboratory of Computer and Information Science, Helsinki University
of Technology, Espoo, Finland.
Kurland, P., & Lerner, R. (Eds.). (1987). The Founders Constitution, Vol.
2. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Longley, P., & Clarke, G. (Eds.). (1995). GIS for Business and Service
Planning. Cambridge: Geoinformation International.
Miller, H., & Han, J. (Eds.). (2001). Geographic Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Openshaw, S. (1989). Neuroclassication of spatial data. In B. C.
Hewitson & R. G. Crane (Eds.), Neural Nets: Applications in
Geography. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Openshaw, S., & Wymer, C. (1995). Classifying and regionalizing census
tracts. In S. Openshaw (Ed.), Census Users Handbook (pp. 239270).
Cambridge: GeoInformation International.
Palm, R., & Caruso, D. (1972). Factor labeling in factorial ecology. Annals
of the Association of American Geographers, 62(1), 122133.
Park, R., & Burgess, E. (1925). The City. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Rees, P. H. (1971). Factorial ecology: An extended denition, survey, and
critique of the eld. Economic Geography, 47(Suppl.: Comparative
Factorial Ecology), 220233.
Robson, B. T. (1969). Urban Analysis: A Study of City Structure with
Special Reference to Sunderland. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Shevky, E., & Williams, M. (1972). The Social Areas of Los Angeles:
Analysis and Typology. Westport: Greenwood Press.
Skupin, A., & Agarwal, P. (2008). Introduction  What is a self-organizing
map. In P. Agarwal & A. Skupin (Eds.), Self-organising Maps:
Applications in Geographic Information Science. Chichester: Wiley.
Skupin, A., & Fabrikant, S. I. (2003). Spatialization methods: A
cartographic research agenda for non-geographic information visual-

ization. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 30(2),
95119.
Skupin, A., & Hagelman, R. (2003). Attribute space visualization of
demographic change. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM International
Symposium on Advances in Geographic Information Systems (pp. 56
62). New Orleans, LA.
Skupin, A., & Hagelman, R. (2005). Visualizing demographic trajectories
with self organizing maps. GeoInformatica, 9(2), 159179.
Takatsuka, M. (2001). An application of the self-organizing map and
interactive 3-D visualization to geospatial data. In D. V. Pullar (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on GeoComputation,
Brisbane, Australia. <http://www.geocomputation.org/2001/papers/
takatsuka.pdf>, Accessed October 30, 2006.
Thill, J.-C., Kretzschmar, W., Casas, I., & Yao, X. (2008). Detecting
geographic associations in English dialect features in North America
within a visual data mining environment integrating self-organizing
maps. In P. Agarwal & A. Skupin (Eds.), Self-organising Maps:
Applications in Geographic Information Science (pp. 6786). Chichester:
Wiley.
Tobler, W. R. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the
detroit region. Economic Geography, 46(Suppl.), 234240.
Utley, G. (March 17, 2001). Cultural Diversity and Americas High
Schools. CNN.
Vickers, D., Rees, P., & Birkin, M. (2005). Working Paper 05/2: Creating
the National Classication of Census Output Areas: Data, Methods,
and Results. School of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
Villmann, T., Merenyi, E., & Hammer, B. (2003). Neural maps in remote
sensing image analysis. Neural Networks, 16(34), 389403.
Ward, D. (1969). The internal spatial structure of immigrant residential
districts in the late nineteenth century. Geographical Analysis, 1(4),
337353.
Ward, D. (1990). Social reform, social surveys, and the discovery of the
modern city. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 80(4),
491503.
Webber, R. (1985). The use of census derived classications in the
marketing of consumer products in the United Kingdom. Journal of
Economic and Social Measurement, 13, 113124.
Webber, R. (2004). Designing geodemographic classications to meet
contemporary business needs. Interactive Marketing, 5(3), 219
237.
Weiss, M. J. (1989). The Clustering of America. New York: Perennial
Library.
Witten, I., & Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning
Tools and Techniques (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Yan, J., & Thill, J.-C. (2008). Visual exploration of spatial interaction data
with self-organizing maps. In P. Agarwal & A. Skupin (Eds.), Selforganising Maps: Applications in Geographic Information Science
(pp. 87106). Chichester: Wiley.
Yan, J., & Thill, J.-C. (in press). Visual data mining in spatial interaction
analysis with self-organizing maps. Environment and Planning B.

