See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330513053

International Information Management Corporation
Conference Paper  May 2018

CITATIONS

READS

0

155

2 authors:
Richard Karanja

Simon Mwendia

KCA University

KCA University

1 PUBLICATION 0 CITATIONS

14 PUBLICATIONS 26 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Open mobile ambient learning (OMAL) project View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Simon Mwendia on 21 January 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

IST-Africa 2018 Conference Proceedings
Paul Cunningham and Miriam Cunningham (Eds)
IIMC International Information Management Corporation, 2018
ISBN: 978-1-905824-59-5

Ambient Learning - Knowledge as a
Service Model: Towards the Achievement
of Sustainable Development Goal Four
Richard Gicharu KARANJA, Simon Nyaga MWENDIA
KCA University, P.O. BOX 56808, Nairobi, Kenya.
Email: r.karanja@kca.ac.ke, smwendia@kca.ac.ke.
Abstract: Studies show that United Nations Sustainable Development Goal Four is
yet to be achieved. This paper presents an artefact named Ambient learningKnowledge as a Service model for describing how actionable knowledge can be
extracted from ambient learning systems to support improvement and consequently
facilitate the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal Four. A creative process
was adopted to guide the development of the model. The process involved carrying
out problem analysis through literature review, designing the model by combining
ambient learning and Knowledge as a Service concepts and demonstrating its
application by developing a prototype. Evaluation results revealed that C4.5
algorithm that is implemented in Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis
(WEKA) software is suitable for extracting knowledge from ambient learning
systems while Swi-prolog software can be applied to create a tool for knowledge
delivery.
Keywords: Knowledge as Service, knowledge extraction, ambient learning,
knowledge consumers.

1.

Introduction

The 2030 agenda for Sustainable Development which was adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on 25 September 2015 seeks to leave no one behind as it aspires to transform
the world we live in [1]. Among the 17 goals that were specified in the agenda, Goal four seeks
to ensure inclusive and quality education for all and to promote lifelong learning. However,
studies reveal that this goal is yet to be fully realized. For instance, results from Kenya National
Adult Literacy Survey show that only 61.5% of the adult and out-of-school youth above 15
years have attained minimum literacy level leaving 38.5% (7.8 million) adults illiterate. A
majority of these are individuals from less fortunate backgrounds who have a limited chance of
attaining quality education owing to lack of reading material and other resources. There also
exists gender disparity in literacy levels with men rated at 64.1% and women at 58.9%[2].
Ambient learning promises to bridge this gap by allowing personalized access to high
quality learning content from anywhere, anytime and anyhow[3]. Nevertheless, the existing
ambient learning models do not describe how knowledge from ambient learning systems can be
extracted to support improvement of such systems. Therefore, there is need to initiate new
mechanisms and paradigms for describing how knowledge can be retrieved and applied to
enhance ambient learning systems.
Knowledge as a Service (KaaS) has been hailed as the new paradigm for acquiring
knowledge through the cloud to support knowledge management [4]. Old knowledge
management technology cannot cut it in this new age of open data and big data environments.
The potential capability of KaaS paradigm presents a unique opportunity for combining it with
ambient approaches to continuously improve quality of education services offered by ambient
learning systems. Despite such an opportunity, little or no research has been undertaken to
Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 1 of 8

explore appropriate model(s) that can be derived from both KaaS and ambient learning
concepts in order to enhance the achievement of sustainable development goal four (SDG 4).

2.

Objectives

The main purpose of our study was to establish an appropriate model that describes how
knowledge can be extracted from ambient learning systems and be used for improving such
systems towards achieving SDG 4. Specific objectives of this work included the following:
1. To establish an appropriate algorithm for extracting knowledge from a typical ambient
learning system.
2. To demonstrate how extracted knowledge can be delivered to the relevant knowledge
consumers.

3.

Research Methodology

To achieve the main objective of our study, the creative process [5] was adopted. This
process is characterized by a sequence of five cognitive activities that can lead to novel, yet
appropriate, productions in a given problem context [5]. The first activity was problem
analysis that entailed to exploring literature in ambient learning and KaaS areas articles to
find existing knowledge gaps. By the end of that activity, twelve (12) publications were
purposively selected and reviewed. The second activity was ideation, which involved
deriving the proposed model using combination strategy [5] to integrate KaaS and ambient
learning concepts. The third activity was Evaluation that entailed assessing the validity of
the model using investigators triangulation method. During this activity, the proposed
model was iteratively submitted to information technology lecturers at KCA University for
the purpose of gathering their opinions until a consensus was reached. The feedback
received from the lecturers was then used to enhance the proposed model. Implementation
activity was the last activity and it involved demonstrating how the model can be
implemented by developing a proof of concept using WEKA data mining tool and Swiprolog software.

4. Technology Description
4.1 Ambient Learning Overview
According to [6], there are three ambient learning approaches that can be implemented in
different contexts depending on the availability of information technology infrastructure.
These are (i) Mobile Interface Ambient Learning (MIAL) that utilizes mobile devices only,
(ii) Fixed Interface Ambient Learning (FIAL) that utilizes location dependent devices only,
and (iii) Hybrid Interface Ambient Learning (HIAL) that utilizes both location dependent
devices and mobile devices.
Open Mobile Ambient Learning (OMAL) [3] is an example of MIAL that combines
characteristics of ambient intelligence (AMI) with mobile learning, open education
resources (OERs) and cloud computing services. This is shown in Figure 1 below.
As indicated in Figure 1, OMAL system consists of the following features [3,7]:
1. Cloud services: provides help in managing and overcoming storage limitations of
mobile devices.
2. Content manager: retrieves relevant online learning material (videos, audios and text)
3. Context manager: collects, evaluates and stores learners details i.e. identity, education
level and preferences.
4. Multimodal access: allows internet access to different data or content representation
modes like audio, video and text.

Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 2 of 8

Figure 1: The OMAL system architectue. Adopted from [7]

However, there are two knowledge gaps in the reviewed literature. First, system
architectures for illustrating how FIAL and HIAL can be implemented are lacking. Second,
OMAL system architecture does not describe how knowledge can be extracted from the
context database for the purpose of continuous improvement of ambient learning system.
Therefore, there is need for innovative models that can be used to address the two gaps.
4.2 Knowledge as a Service (KaaS) Paradigm.
Traditional stand-alone platforms of client and server architecture are too rigid to keep pace
with changes in knowledge management but cloud computing solves this challenge
efficiently and effectively[8] . Cloud computing by definition is a three layer model of
distributed computing. That is, (i) Software as a Service (SaaS) which provides the interface
and top-level functionality, (ii) Platform as a Service (PaaS) which handles the processing
necessary for applications to work and, (iii) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) layer that
handles low level services like database administration [9]. KaaS on the other hand refers to
a platform for providing the best knowledge, leveraging it from anywhere, anything and
anyone in a distributed computing model [10]. Figure 2 illustrates the basic KaaS
paradigm.
Knowledge as a Service

Data Owner 1

Knowledge extractor
e.g. (the data owners
Knowledge
Jointly run a privacyServer
Knowledge Server
Preserving data mining
Algorithm

Data owner 2

Knowledge
Consumer 1

Knowledge
Consumer 2

Knowledge
Consumer m

Data Owner m

Figure 2: KaaS paradigm. Adopted from [10]

As described in Figure 2, KaaS paradigm consists of three main interacting components.
That is, (i) Data owners who collect data from their daily system usage logs, (ii) Knowledge
service providers who deliver extracted knowledge from datasets through an appropriate
knowledge extractor and, (iii) Knowledge consumers who access a knowledge server in
their decision making procedures [10].
4.3 Knowledge Extraction Algorithms
In recent years, many algorithms in the literature have been created for extracting
knowledge in the data. Examples are 10 artificial intelligence algorithms that have been
identified that have been identified by the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 3 of 8

(ICDM) as among the most influential algorithms for classification, statistical learning,
association analysis, clustering and link mining [11]. They include (1) C4.5 and beyond, (2)
K-means, (3) support vector machines, (4)Apriori algorithm, (5)The Expectation
Maximization algorithm, (6) PageRank, (7) AdaBoost, (8) Knn-Nearest Neighbor, (9)
Naive Bayes and finally (10) Classification and Regression Trees (CART). All these
algorithms are applied effectively in various areas of applications such as technology
enhanced learning to overcome knowledge extraction challenges.

5. Developments

Ambient
Learning
System Module

Data

Knowledge
KAAS
KAAS Provider
Provider
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Extractor
serverbased
Cloud
Extractor
server
(e.g. artificial
( e.g.
intelligence
artificial
algorithm)
intelligence
algorithm

KaaS
Paradigm
Module

Figure 3: Ambient Learning - Knowledge as a Service Model.

The main objective of KaaS is to generate knowledge from heterogeneous data located in a
cloud environment and make it available as a knowledge service[12]. This objective
provides a potential solution for addressing knowledge management limitation of OMAL
system architecture. Nevertheless, little or no research has been conducted to explore how
the KaaS can be merged with ambient learning approaches to enhance knowledge
management in ambient learning systems.
To address this gap, we propose an ambient learning-KaaS model that can be used to
continually enhance ambient learning systems. The framework is derived from[7] and [10]
models. This is shown in Figure 3.
As illustrated in Figure 3, the proposed architecture consists of the following components:
 Ambient learning system module: Allows learners to access open education resources
and other cloud related service in different contexts as is relevant to the learners.
 KaaS Paradigm module has three main components that can be summarized as follows:
(a) Data owners access data from ambient learning system through context database.
They can freely utilize the data and are responsible for ensuring its security. An
example is the learning institution that provides the data storage infrastructure.
(b) KaaS provider is made up of two sub-components. First, a knowledge extractor in
the form of a data mining algorithm that processes and transforms the data from the
Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 4 of 8

ambient learning system context database and finds the patterns hidden in the data.
Second, a knowledge server that is used to deliver knowledge to knowledge
consumers e.g. knowledge based systems (KBS).
(c) Knowledge consumer is any entity that consumes the services offered by the KaaS
provider under specific service level agreements (SLA).
In order to demonstrate feasibility of ambient learning-KaaS model, proof of concept
was developed. KCA University, which acted as data owner provided data collected from
ambient learning system that was piloted in 2014 by [3, 7]. Decision tree algorithm named
C4.5 was then applied to extract knowledge from the already collected data. Finally, Swiprolog software was adopted to develop a knowledge server prototype for delivering
knowledge to ambient learning experts that represented knowledge consumers. These
included the authors of open mobile ambient learning (OMAL) system in KCA University
[3]. The results of this proof of concept are presented and analyzed in the results section
below.

6.

Results

Among the identified 10 ten data mining algorithms, C4.5 constructs decision trees that can
readily be grasped by non-specialists like some of the knowledge consumers in ambient
learning environment [11]. Therefore, the algorithm was adopted to build decision tree
using OMAL system. This is shown in Figure 4.
Action Performed

=AccessFeedback

Local Service
(203.0)

=ReadText

Googledocs
(218.0/53.0)

=WatchVideo =Collaborate

Googledrive
(76.0/6.0)

Facebook
(34.0)

=AccessExample

Googledocs
(71.0/25.0)

Figure 4: C4.5 Decision Tree

As illustrated in Figure 4, the following knowledge was extracted from the data:
1. Ambient learning system can allow learners to access feedback, read text materials,
watch videos, collaborate and access examples. Using a test data of 602 cases, cross
validation results indicated that, the decision tree model was 84.4% accurate. That is,
508 instances were correctly classified instances while 94 instances were incorrectly
classified instances.
2. Learners can access feedback through local service (local database server).Findings
indicated that course work results were accessed from locally available database instead
of cloud-based repository. Cross validation test results showed that out of 203 cases
covered by this rule, none of them was misclassified.
3. Ambient learning system enables learners to access text-based materials through
Google docs. Cross validation test results revealed that out of 218 instances covered by
this rule, 53 of them were incorrectly classified.
4. Ambient learning system can allow access to video materials stored in a Google drive.
10-fold cross-validation test results showed that out of 76 cases covered by this rule,
only 6 of them were incorrectly classified.
Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 5 of 8

5. Ambient learning system can allow learners to collaborate through Facebook.
Evaluation results showed that, out of 34 instances covered by this rule, none of them
was misclassified.
Having extracted knowledge from ambient learning system, the next step was to create
knowledge server (KS) for delivering knowledge to knowledge consumers. For the purpose
of our study, prolog was used to demonstrate how stand alone knowledge server can be
implemented. The server was made up of the following three main components:
1. Inference engine that is already inbuilt within prolog.
2. Knowledgebase component that was used for storing rules and facts extracted from
ambient learning system. Figure 5 shows a sample of knowledge stored in the
knowledgebase.

Figure 5: Sample of Knowledge Stored in the Knowledgebase.

3. User interface component, which was created to support interaction between
knowledge consumers (KC) and the server. This shown in figure 6.

Figure 6: User Interface for Enabling Interaction between KC and the Server.

Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 6 of 8

As illustrated in Figure 6, knowledge consumers could be an ambient learning expert,
inquiring which cloud-based tools that can be integrated in ambient learning system for
enabling certain actions. For example, when the knowledge consumer (KC) starts the server
he/she types menu on the prolog prompt and gets a reply of the cloud based services and
local service available. Upon keying in the relevant number for either a cloud or local
service, KC receives action knowledge regarding tools that can be incorporated in an
ambient learning system to enhance its effectiveness.

7.

Benefits

The adoption of the proposed model is expected to support continuous enhancement of
existing ambient learning systems towards the realization of SDG goal 4. Therefore, the
model will not only help revolutionize learning but also bring ambient learning to the
forefront as one of the most efficient tools for providing inclusive and quality education for
all. Additionally, incorporating an interactive component in KAAS can help to crowd
source knowledge that may be useful in size or time units to knowledge consumers in
ambient learning environments.

8.

Conclusions and Future Work

This study proposed a new model that was derived from a combination of ambient learning
concept and KaaS with an aim of supporting the achievement of United Nations SDG 4.
Results revealed that the model can be implemented using an appropriate data mining tool
to extract knowledge from ambient learning system and using swi-prolog to create stand
knowledge server. The extracted knowledge can then be used by the ambient learning
system experts to improve an existing or new ambient learning system.
However, the study has three limitations. First, the proposed model was evaluated using
only data collected from a case of MIAL approach. That is, the OMAL system that was
piloted in KCA University. Second, among the identified top ten knowledge extraction
algorithms, only C4.5 was used to demonstrate the application of the proposed model.
Third, implementation of knowledge server was demonstrated using only one artificial
intelligence tool. That is, swi-prolog that use predicate logic to represent knowledge.
Therefore, future research activities that are aimed to extend ate extending this work can
focus on three main areas. That is, (i) Evaluating the model using data from instantiations
FIAL and HIAL, (ii) Exploring other data mining algorithms that can handle different sets
of data for faster and easier dissemination of knowledge, and (iii) Explore other
programming tools in the field of artificial intelligence that can facilitate implementation of
a knowledge server with a more user friendly interface.

References
[1] The United Nations, Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
United Nations, 2017.
[2] UNESCO, Adult and Youth Literacy: National, Regional and Global Trends, 1985-2015. UNESCO,
2013.
[3] S. Mwendia, O. Robert, and P. Waiganjo, Dynamic Heuristics - Greedy Search: A Mobile Information
Retrieval Algorithm for Ambient Learning Systems, presented at the Africhi06, Nairobi, 2016.
[4] A. Depeige and D. Doyencourt, Actionable Knowledge as a Service (AKAAS): Leveraging big data
analytics in cloud computing environments, J. Big Data, vol. 2, 2015.
[5] L. Zeng, Robert W. Proctor, and Gavriel Salvendy, Can Traditional Divergent Thinking Tests Be
Trusted in Measuring and Predicting Real-World Creativity?, Creat. Res. J., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 2437,
2011.
[6] S. Mwendia, P. Waiganjo, and R. Oboko, 3-Category Pedagogical Framework for Context Based
Ambient Learning, presented at the IST Africa, 2013.

Copyright  2018 The authors

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 7 of 8

[7] S. N. Mwendia, S. Manske, and H. U. Hoppe, Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
Computers in Education. Japan: Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education, 2014.
[8] M. Mohamed and S. Pillutla, Cloud computing: a collaborative green platform for the knowledge
society, VINE, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 357374, 2014.
[9] N. Aharony, Cloud computing: information professionals and educational technology experts
perspectives, Libr. Hi Tech, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 645666, 2014.
[10] S. Xu and W. Zhang, Knowledge as a service and knowledge breaching, in 2005 IEEE International
Conference on Services Computing(SCC05), Orlando,Florida, 2005.
[11] X. Wu et al., Top 10 algorithms in Datamining, Springer-Verlang, vol. 14, no. 1, 2008.
[12] A. Talib, R. Atan, R. Abdulleh, and M. Murad, A model of knowledge management system for
facilitating knowledge as a service (KaaS) in cloud computing environment, IEEE, 2011.

Copyright  2018 The authors

View publication stats

www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2018

Page 8 of 8

