Progressing Toward Digital Equity
Ramon Puigjaner(&)
IFIP Vice-President, Catalonia, Spain
putxi@uib.cat

Abstract. In the computer domain, the objective to be reached in order to give
opportunities equality to all persons is dened as Digital Equity. However,
different international organizations are working to reach this goal. The analysis
of the key points for reaching this objective and how international organizations
(International Telecommunications Union, United Nations, International Federation for Information Processing) are working for this goal will be presented in
the paper.
Keywords: Digital equity  Building the infrastructure  Education levels  ITU
WSIS  UN SDG  IFIP

1 Introduction
ICT is a set of technologies that well used should allow the progress and the wellbeing
of people everywhere in the world. However as there are important differences in the
current situation of people, depending on its general level of use in each country, the
use of ICT to reach the progress and the wellbeing cannot be the same in all countries.
To evaluate this influence of the ICT we will use the concept of Digital Equity.
Digital equity [1] is the social-justice goal of ensuring that everyone in our society
has equal access to technology tools, computers and the Internet. Even more, it is when
all individuals have the knowledge and skills to access and use technology tools,
computers and the Internet. A simple denition of digital equity can be a state in which
both the digital divide and the participation gap are bridged.
Digital equity ensures that everyone has equal opportunities to use the tools and
resources needed to fully participate as a citizen in todays digitally-powered world.
Lacking these opportunities causes people to encounter educational, economic and
social limitations that negatively impact their quality of life. The progress towards the
Digital Equity, as it is established in the IFIP strategic action, should be achieved by:





Promoting accessibility to ICT,
Promoting good practices,
Promoting and enhancing appropriate access to knowledge and experiences,
Organizing and contributing to activities aimed at achieving the goals of the World
Summit on the Information Society (ITU-WSIS) [2],
 Organizing and contributing to activities aimed at achieving the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) [3], as we will analyze in Sect. 4.

 IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2016
Published by Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016. All Rights Reserved
F.J. Mata and A. Pont (Eds.): WITFOR 2016, IFIP AICT 481, pp. 109120, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-44447-5_11

110

R. Puigjaner

To analyze in depth the points suggested in the previous paragraphs, this paper will
be organized as follows: in Sect. 2 the concept of Digital Equity will be detailed;
Sect. 3 will be devoted to the relations of Digital Equity with the ITU-WSIS Action
Lines; the relation of ITU-WSIS Action Lines with the UN Sustainable Development
Goals will be the topic of Sect. 4. In Sect. 5 it is analyze the differences of Digital
Equity in developed and developing countries and how IFIP [4] can contribute to reach
these goals. Finally Sect. 6 gives some conclusions about the coming future.

2 Concept of Digital Equity
2.1

What Is Digital Equity?

As it has been stated in the previous section, Digital equity is the social-justice goal of
ensuring that everyone in our society has equal access to technology tools, computers
and the Internet. Even more, it is when all individuals have the knowledge and skills to
access and use technology tools, computers and the Internet. Digital equity can be
dened as the state in which both the digital divide and the participation gap are both
bridged. Digital equity ensures that everyone has equal opportunities to use the tools
and resources needed to fully participate as a citizen in todays digitally-powered
world. Lacking these opportunities causes people to encounter educational, economic
and social limitations that negatively impact their quality of life.
Technology is so commonplace in our lives that it may be hard to believe there are
still many people with limited access to and knowledge of the resources that are
available online today. Children still stand in lines at libraries for a brief stint on a
computer and parents have difculty completing online employment applications; a
clear and important difference between the new digital generation and the previous
ones. While cell phones may have helped to close the gap to some degree, there are still
important activities that are not well-suited for small mobile devices.

2.2

The Five Dimensions of Digital Equity

These dimensions have been chosen as fundamental categories by educators and
professionals working in the eld. If you are just beginning to learn about this eld then
these categories should help you address your basic needs:
 Access to technology resources (hardware, software, wiring and connectivity):
possibility to have access to the technological resources allowing us to access the
information existing in the network.
 Access to high quality digital content; if the information available in the network is
not of good quality, people will not be attracted to access it.
 Access to high quality, culturally relevant content; the available information should
not only be of high quality but adapted to the context in which each community is
leaving.
 Educators skilled in using these resources effectively for teaching and learning; it Is
obvious that for approaching the digital equity it is necessary to educate users but in

Progressing Toward Digital Equity

111

many environments there are not enough people with appropriate skills for learning
end users in all the needed categories (e.g. basic user, advanced user, expert in
installation and maintenance, hardware and software developer and builder, ICT
research).
 Opportunities for learners and educators to create their own content; a way to
increase the capacity of learners and educators is to offer them some tools to create
contents accessible to the appropriate end users.

2.3

Digital Divide Impacts

It is difcult to have progress toward Digital Equity homogeneously in its ve dimensions and, in consequence the risk to fall in Digital Divide exists, at least in someone of
the ve dimensions. How to avoid this inconvenient situation? What are the initial steps
to progress toward Digital Equity?
 First it is necessary to allow that people can obtain the education allowing to
conveniently using computers and networks in a large sense that is that users need
to acquire a convenient knowledge for a correct use of computers and networks
depending on the people desired education level: basic user, advanced user, expert
in installation and maintenance, hardware and software developer and builder, ICT
research, etc..
 And second people should be able to easily and deeply use both computers and
networks for accessing and using all kind of information. Without infrastructure the
other dimensions have no sense. But the investment in a new infrastructure has to be
done only if the possibility of maintaining it is ensured; otherwise there is an
important risk of wasting the funds of this investment.
In summary, the rst steps to reach Digital Equity should be education and
infrastructure. However the progress towards Digital Equity cannot be reached through
individual efforts but by the coordinate effect of actions promoted by governments and
governmental organizations. The global organizations to consider will be the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the United Nations (UN) and the International
Federation for Information Processing (IFIP).

3 Relation Between Digital Equity and the ITU-WSIS Action
Lines
3.1

WSIS Action Lines

The Action Lines of the World Summit in Information Society (WSIS), proposed by
the ITU are:
AL1. The role of public governance authorities and all stakeholders in the promotion of ICTs for development
AL2. Information and communication infrastructure

112

R. Puigjaner

AL3.
AL4.
AL5.
AL6.
AL7.

Access to information and knowledge
Capacity building
Building condence and security in the use of ICTs
Enabling environment
ICT Applications: benets in all aspects of life
AL7.1 E-Government
AL7.2 E-Business
AL7.3 E-Learning
AL7.4 E-Health
AL7.5 E-Employment
AL7.6 E-Environment
AL7.7 E-Agriculture
AL7.8 E-Science
AL8. Cultural diversity and identity, linguistic diversity and local content
AL9. Media
AL10. Ethical dimensions of the Information Society
AL11. International and regional cooperation.

3.2

Relation Between WSIS and Digital Equity

The action lines proposed by the ITU have as global goal the implementation of the
Digital Equity in order to avoid the Digital Divide. The description of these Action
Lines can be found in [2]. Maybe the idea of Digital Equity with respect to the WSIS
Action Lines is not explicitly expressed, but after reading the documentation contained
in [2], the conclusion is that Digital Equity should be considered as a transversal goal,
common to all action lines. The goal of each one of these Action Lines works, in some
way, to complete one or several dimensions of Digital Equity. Some examples of this
fact are presented in the coming sections.
Example 1. Action Line 2: Information and Communication Infrastructure. The
vision of this action line, as it is dened in [2], is: Infrastructure is the cornerstone in
achieving goals such as digital inclusion, enabling universal, sustainable, ubiquitous
and affordable access to ICTs by all, taking into account relevant experiences from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
Digital Equity should be supported by a convenient infrastructure. So the infrastructure suggested in this Action Line has to be able to allow all citizens the correct
access and use of ICT, covering one of the ve dimensions of the Digital Equity.
Example 2: Action Line 3: Access to Information and Knowledge. The vision of
this action line, as it is dened in [2], is: For the post-2015, it is envisioned inclusive
information and knowledge societies to facilitate access and use of information and
exchange of knowledge among all people, including those coming from previously
marginalized groups and regions in addition to persons with impairments with a signicant portion of knowledge flows and innovations that advance human rights and the
attainment of development goals.

Progressing Toward Digital Equity

113

To succeed with the Digital Equity the government has to create and offer information and knowledge to all citizens or to establish the appropriate mechanisms
allowing the creation and offering of information and knowledge accessible for all
citizens. Otherwise there is the risk of provoking the Digital Divide between the
citizens of the same country or between the citizens of the country with the citizens of
other countries.
Example 3: Action Line 8: Cultural Diversity and Identity, Linguistic Diversity
and Local Content. The vision of this action line, as it is dened in [2], is: The vision
on inclusive Knowledge Societies is that of a more culturally and linguistically diverse
digital world, where around 40 % of all existing languages are present in cyberspace
and where development takes into account local, national and regional contexts, builds
on the knowledge generated by all communities, promotes innovation and creativity,
and allows all human beings to practice their own culture and enjoy that of others free
from fear. It is a world where marginalized groups, including indigenous peoples, and
those coming from migrations, diasporas and from language minorities, enjoy
increased recognition and equity; artists, cultural professionals and practitioners are
empowered to create, produce, disseminate enjoy and preserve a broad range of cultural
goods, services and activities; and where intangible expressions inherited from past
generations are kept alive for future generations.
If the global goal is to attain the Digital Equity it is necessary to respect the cultural
diversity and identity giving the convenient importance to the linguistic diversity and
local content. Otherwise there will be people without interest in accessing the information existing in the network and avoiding the attainment of the Digital Equity.

4 ITU-WSIS Action Lines and the UN Sustainable
Development Goals
4.1

UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)

The recently dened by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals are:
SDG1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere
SDG2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture
SDG3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
SDG4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all
SDG5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
SDG6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water for all
SDG7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
SDG8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all
SDG9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation

114

R. Puigjaner

SDG10. Reduce inequality within and among countries
SDG11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
SDG12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
SDG13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
SDG14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development
SDG15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat desertication, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
SDG16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels
SDG17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development
Each one of these goals is divided in [3] in a number of sub-goals (83) whose
analysis allows a better understanding with respect to WSIS ALs and to the IFIP TCs.

4.2

Relations Between the UN SDG and the WSIS Action Lines

WSIS has prepared a matrix indicating the effect of each one of the Action Lines on the
different Sustainable Development Goals [5]. Table 1 presents these relations.
Table 1. Effect of each one of the Action Lines on the SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere
2. End hunger, achieve food security and
improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture
3. Ensure healthy lives and promote
well-being for all at all ages
4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality
education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities for all
5. Achieve gender equality and empower all
women and girls
6. Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all
7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all
8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work
for all

WSIS Action Lines
AL1, AL2, AL3, AL4, AL5, AL7.2, AL7.4,
AL7.7, AL7.8, AL10
AL3, AL4, AL6, AL7.2, AL7.4, AL7.7,
AL8, AL10
AL1, AL3, AL4, AL7.4, AL7.7, AL8, AL10
AL3, AL4, AL5, AL6, AL7.3, AL7.5,
AL7.7, AL8, AL10
AL1, AL3, AL4, AL5, AL6, AL7.2, AL7.4,
AL7.7, AL9, AL10
AL3, AL4, AL7.8, AL8
AL3, AL5, AL7.8
AL2, AL3, AL5, AL6, AL7.5, AL7.7, AL8,
AL10

(Continued)

Progressing Toward Digital Equity

115

Table 1. (Continued)
Sustainable Development Goal
9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization
and foster innovation
10. Reduce inequality within and among
countries
11. Make cities and human settlements
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
12. Ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns
13. Take urgent action to combat climate
change and its impacts
14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans,
seas and marine resources for sustainable
development
15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable
use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably
manage forests, combat desertication, and
halt and reverse land degradation and halt
biodiversity loss
16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, provide
access to justice for all and build effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels
17. Strengthen the means of implementation
and revitalize the global partnership for
sustainable development

WSIS Action Lines
AL2, AL3, AL5, AL6, AL7.1, AL7.2,
AL7.6, AL7.7, AL9, AL10
AL1, AL3, AL6, AL7.5, AL10
AL2, AL3, AL5, AL6, AL7.6, AL8, AL10
AL3, AL4, AL7.5, AL7.7, AL8, AL9, AL10
AL3, AL4, AL7.6, AL7.7, AL7.8, AL10
AL3, AL4, AL7.6, AL7.8

AL3, AL7.6, AL7.8

AL1, AL3, AL4, AL5, AL6, AL7.1, AL9,
AL10

AL1, AL3, AL4, AL5, AL6, AL7.1, AL7.2,
AL7.4, AL7.5, AL7.7, AL7.8, AL9, AL10,
AL11

If all WSIS Action Lines have some impact in the UN SDGs, the actions conducting to the Digital Equity will contribute at some level to approach the UN SDGs.
So we can say that Digital Equity establishes the UN SDG in the specic domain of
ICT that is WSIS Action Lines represent the application of SDG in the ICT domain. In
some sense the dimensions of Digital Equity are included in one or several SDG and
actions going toward Digital Equity contribute to the UN SDGs.

5 Digital Equity in Different Groups or Environments
Is Digital Equity in identical situation in all countries? Is Digital Equity in identical
situation for the different genders?
It would be interesting to see the situation of Digital Equity with respect to different
criteria like developed versus developing countries, like gender issue, etc. but let us
concentrate in this article in the differences between developed and developing countries.

116

5.1

R. Puigjaner

Situation of Digital Equity in Developed and Developing Countries

Digital Equity is neither yet reached in developed nor in developing countries. However the level of Digital Equity is quite different in developed and in developing
countries. We can analyze these differences comparing the state of the ve dimensions
of Digital Equity in both types of countries.
 Access to technology resources (hardware, software, wiring and connectivity):
possibility to have access to the technological resources allowing us to access the
information existing in the network: Obviously the situation of the technological
resources in developed countries is more comfortable than in developing ones,
mainly because the extension of the network coverage and its capacity in developed
countries are much more higher, faster and reliable than in developing ones. Also
because the availability of devices in developed countries is greater, with higher
novelty of models and at prices economically cheaper taking into account the economic level of the country. And nally the possibility for the end users of receiving
the appropriate education is also higher; and this is true at all levels of education:
basic user, advanced user, expert in installation and maintenance, hardware and
software developer and builder, ICT research, etc.; it is easy to nd the necessary
education at reasonable prices for all type of education. Also in many countries there
are strong differences in the access possibilities for the different genders.
 Access to high quality digital content; if the information available in the network is
not of good quality, people will not be attracted to access it. Developed countries
have an infrastructure allowing the access to all information existing in Internet by
both the quality of the physical connection and the freedom for accessing all kind of
information. Developing countries can have limitations by one or both of these
aspects; in some cases the network has not enough capacity for accessing heavy
information, and in other cases the access is limited by political reasons.
 Access to high quality, culturally relevant content; the available information should
not only be of high quality but adapted to the context in which each community is
living. Most of the web pages are written in English (or at least is the greatest
minority) making difcult the access of people not fluent in reading this language.
Also the topics contained in these pages are thought with Anglo-Saxon parameters
making the access by people of other cultures of low interest. Consequence: not all
pages are equally interesting for all people in the world, increasing the disadvantages of people of developing countries.
 Educators skilled in using these resources for effectively teaching and learning; it Is
obvious that for approaching the digital equity it is necessary to educate users but in
many environments there are not enough people with appropriate skills for learning
end users in all the needed categories. Education is a key point for reaching Digital
Equity. However to deliver education it is necessary to have educators of all the
needed proles. The number and quality of the education centres dedicated to the
educators are higher in developed than in developing countries.

Progressing Toward Digital Equity

117

 Opportunities for learners and educators to create their own content; a way to
increase the capacity of learners and educators is to offer them some tool to create
contents accessible to the appropriate end users. The hardware and software
infrastructure is much more solid in developed than in developing countries.

5.2

Contribution of IFIP to Digital Equity

The International Federation for Information Processing is a society created in 1960
under the auspices of UNESCO grouping computer societies under the base of one
member society per country. From the technical point of view IFIP is composed of a
number of Technical Committees (TC) each one dedicated to a specic aspect of
computer science, engineering and applications. Each TC is composed of a number of
Working Groups (WG), each one devoted to a specic aspect of the TC domain.
Currently there are 13 TCs and 120 WGs grouping thousands of computer professionals.
IFIP has decided that Digital Equity is one of its Strategic Activity Lines. In general
we can consider that the work of all these bodies contribute to the Digital Equity.
However there are some of them are more specically oriented to tackle the Digital
Divide and empowering Digital Equity.
From the previous introduction let us review the different TCs and analyze what is
their involvement in some aspect of the Digital Equity. The IFIP TCs are:
 TC1 on Foundations of Computer Science, whose aims are: to support the development of theoretical computer science as a fundamental science; and to support the
development and exploration of fundamental concepts, models, theories, systems,
and and the understanding of laws, limits, and possibilities of information processing. Its influence on Digital Equity is generic but not directly implied.
 TC2 on Software, Theory and Practice, whose aim is to obtain a deeper understanding of programming concepts in order to improve the quality of software by
studying all aspects of the software development process, both theoretical and
practical. So, building good software products has a positive influence on Digital
Equity mainly promoting good practices in the creation of software products.
 TC3 on Education whose aims are: to provide an international forum for educators
to discuss research and practice in: teaching informatics; and educational uses of
communication and information technologies (ICT); to establish models for informatics curricula, training programs, and teaching methodologies; to consider the
relationship of informatics in other curriculum areas; to promote the ongoing
education of ICT professionals and those in the workforce whose employment
involves the use of information and communication technologies; to examine the
impact of information and communication technologies on the whole educational
environment: teaching and learning; administration and management of the educational enterprise; and local, national and regional policy-making and collaboration. As education is a key factor for reaching Digital Equity, we can see that the
aims of this TC are fully in line with the dimensions of Digital Equity.
 TC5 on Information Technology Applications whose aim is to promote research
and development of fundamental concepts, models, and theories to support

118









R. Puigjaner

applications of ICT. So, it has a generic interest for Digital Equity; only the promotion of applications appropriate for developing countries can help to attain
Digital Equity.
TC6 on Communication Systems, whose aims are to promote the international
exchange of information related to communication systems; to bridge gaps existing
between users, telecommunication operators, service providers and computer and
equipment manufacturers; and to establish working contacts with international
bodies concerned with data communication, such as ITU, ETSI, ISO, IEEE, IETF,
ITC and ATM Forum. The aims of this TC are fully in line with a dimension of the
Digital Equity (creation of a convenient infrastructure). In particular in this TC there
is a WG devoted to developing countries so dedicated to bridge the gap between
developed and developing countries with respect to Digital Equity. This is the
WG6.9 on Communications Systems for Developing Countries, whose aims are: to
identify and study technical problems related to the access to, understanding of and
application of network and telecommunications technology in developing countries
or regions; to encourage cross-fertilization of concepts and techniques among
developing countries, and between developing countries and developed countries;
to promote activities oriented to the diffusion of the methods and techniques for
accessing computer networks in developing countries or regions.
TC7 on System Modelling and Optimization, whose aims are: to provide an
international clearing house for computational (as well as related theoretical)
aspects of optimization problems; to promote the development of necessary theory
to meet the needs of complex optimization problems and cooperate with the
International Mathematics Union; and to foster interdisciplinary activity on optimization problems spanning the areas such as Economics, Biomedicine, Meteorology, etc., in cooperation with associated international bodies. So, it has not a
specic interest for Digital Equity.
TC8 on Information Systems whose aim is to promote and encourage interactions
among professionals from practice and research and advancement of investigation
of concepts, methods, techniques, tools, and issues related to information systems in
organizations. So, it has a generic interest for Digital Equity specially proposing
good practices for the information systems.
TC9 on ICT and Society whose aims are: to develop understanding of how ICT
progress is associated with change in society; and to influence the shaping of
socially responsible and ethical policies and professional practices.
The aims of this TC are fully in line with several dimensions of the Digital Equity.
In particular it has a WG devoted to Developing countries dedicated to bridge the gap
between developed and developing countries. It is the WG9.4 on Social Implications
of Computers in Developing Countries, whose aims are: to collect, exchange and
disseminate experiences of ICT implementation in developing countries; to develop
a consciousness amongst professionals, policy makers and public on social implications of ICT in developing nations; to develop criteria, theory, methods, and
guidelines for design and implementation of culturally adapted information systems;
and to create a greater interest in professionals from industrialized countries to focus
on issues of special relevance to developing countries.

Progressing Toward Digital Equity

119

 TC10 on Computer Systems Technology, whose aim is the promotion of the
State-of-the-Art and the coordination of information exchange on concepts,
methodologies, and tools in the stages in the life cycle of computer systems. So, it
has a generic but not specic interest for Digital Equity.
 TC11 on Security and Privacy Protection in Information Processing Systems whose
aim is to increase the trustworthiness and general condence in information processing and to act as a forum for security and privacy protection experts and others
professionally active in the eld. Obviously the topics concerned by this TC are of
high importance for reaching Digital Equity, ensuring the needed security and
privacy protection to the information and to the end users.
 TC12 on Articial Intelligence whose aims are: to foster the development and
understanding of Articial Intelligence and its applications worldwide; to promote
interdisciplinary exchanges between Articial Intelligence and other elds of
information processing; and to contribute to the overall aims and objectives and
further development of IFIP as the international body for Information Processing.
The aims of this TC are not of specic interest for Digital Equity.
 TC13 on Human-Computer Interaction whose aims are: to encourage empirical
research (using valid and reliable methodology, with studies of the methods themselves where necessary); to promote the use of knowledge and methods from the
human sciences in both design and evaluation of computer systems; to promote
better understanding of the relation between formal design methods and system
usability and acceptability; to develop guidelines, models and methods by which
designers may be able to provide better human-oriented computer systems; and to
co-operate with other groups, inside and outside IFIP, so as to promote userorientation and humani-zation in system design. Obviously the topics concerned
by this TC are important for reaching Digital Equity, because a good interface to the
searched information helps a lot to its usability by the end users.
 TC14 on Entertainment Computing whose aims are: to enhance algorithmic research
on board and card games; to promote a new type of entertainment using information
technologies; to encourage hardware technology research and development to
facilitate implementing entertainment systems; and to encourage non-traditional
human interface technologies for entertainment. Maybe the topics concerned by this
TC are marginal for reaching Digital Equity, but it works on topics making the access
to information more attractive to the end users.
So IFIP has convenient bodies to tackle the problems derived from and related to
Digital Equity in general and specically in developing countries. The recent creation
of a Standing Committee in Digital Equity will increase and coordinate the action to
promote the Digital Equity.

6 Conclusions
We have analyzed the concept of Digital Equity and the different aspect it includes.
Also we have seen how several international organizations; the Action Lines of the
World Summit in Information Society, the United Nations Sustainable Development

120

R. Puigjaner

Goals and the Technical Committees of the International Federation for Information
Processing have a strong overlapping with the goals proposed by Digital Equity.
Maybe these international organizations have not an exact coincidence on their goals,
but an important overlap between them has been clearly stated.

References
1. International Society for Technology Education: Digital Equity Toolkit  Working Draft
(2006)
2. World Summit in Information Society: WSIS Action lines. http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/
implementation/
3. United Nations: Transforming our World  The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
goals. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/topics
4. International Federation for Information Processing: Structure of IFIP. http://www.ip.org/
index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=131&Itemid=448
5. World Summit in Information Society: WSIS-SDG Matrix Linking WSIS Action Lines with
Sustainable Development Goals. http://www.itu.int/net4/wsis/sdg/Content/wsis-sdg_matrix_
document.pdf

