AI4D. Mann & Hilbert 2018

AI4D: Artificial Intelligence for Development
Supreet Mann & Martin Hilbert
University of California, Davis; Dpt. of Communication
sumann@ucdavis.edu ; hilbert@ucdavis.edu
October, 2018; Main Article: 8,527 words; Online Appendix 11,260 words

ABSTRACT
In line with a long research tradition focused on the use of information and communication
technology for development (ICT4D), we explore the role of artificial intelligence (AI4D). We start
with a rather technical review of four of the characteristic traits of deep learning technologies,
which leads to natural metaphors for international development. Based on the empirical
evidence of 24 case studies, we derive four characteristics of the use of AI4D that align with the
four technological traits. In isolation, each one of them presents a plethora of opportunities to
contribute to international development, especially to the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). However, in combination, they create a clear tension between a
looming threat of a hegemonic intelligence indoctrination pushed by global economies of scale,
and the potential promise to not only honor, but to celebrate local diversity with the help of
flexible AI designs. We conclude that the latter cannot be achieved without an active public policy
dialogue on the international level and a determined effort on the national levels, especially in
developing countries. The study provides terminology and concepts to identify and frame the
arising discussions.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

2
AI: THE THEORY
CURRENT STATE OF AFFAIRS

5
5

A SHORT HISTORY OF AI
TODAYS AI: MACHINE LEARNING
FUTURE OUTLOOK ON AI

6
6
7

DEEP LEARNING ARCHITECTURES

8

DEEP LAYERS: REPRESENTATION
MULTITASK- AND TRANSFER LEARNING: REUSE
CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS: ROBUSTNESS
OVERFITTING: REGULARIZATION

8
10
11
11

AI4D: THE PRACTICE
AI REPRESENTATION FOR LOCAL INTELLIGENCE
AI REUSE FOR DISTANCE INTELLIGENCE
AI ROBUSTNESS FOR AUGMENTED REALITY
AI REGULARIZATION FOR DETAILED REALITY

13
15
16
18
19

DISCUSSION: DEVELOPMENT AT THE AI CROSSROADS
GLOBAL EFFICIENCY AND LOCAL DIVERSITY
REGULATING INTERNATIONAL AI REGULARIZATION
GLOBAL NEGOTIATIONS AND LOCAL EFFORTS

20
21
22
23

REFERENCES

26

APPENDIX: AI4D CASE STUDIES

34

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

35
36
38
40
41
42
44
45
46
47
48
49
51
52
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
63
65
66

CASE STUDY: AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY.
CASE STUDY: PHARMACEUTICAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ENGINES.
CASE STUDY: AUTOMATING EDUCATION
CASE STUDY: LOCAL MACHINE LEARNING ON LEARNING CONDITIONS
CASE STUDY: FROM VIRTUAL TO REAL GENDER EQUALITY
CASE STUDY: INCLUSIVE, SAFE AND SUSTAINABLE CITIES
CASE STUDY: SMARTER CITIES
CASE STUDY: HIBOT, OPTIMIZING WATER RESOURCES.
CASE STUDY: INTELLIGENCE IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
CASE STUDY: TIMBER CONSERVATION
CASE STUDY: USING AI TO ASSIST MEDICAL TASKS.
CASE STUDY: ECONOMIC GROWTH POTENTIAL ACROSS INDUSTRIES
CASE STUDY: MOBILE PHONE MALARIA DIAGNOSIS.
CASE STUDY: MEDICAL IMAGING AND INTELLIGENT HEALTHCARE
CASE STUDY: DIAGNOSING TUBERCULOSIS.
CASE STUDY: BABYLON MEDICAL CONSULTATIONS
CASE STUDY: CONGENITAL CATARACTS, A TREATABLE DISEASE.
CASE STUDY: FROM VIRTUAL TO REAL GENDER EQUALITY
CASE STUDY: GIUSEPPE, PLANT-BASED REPLACEMENTS OF ANIMAL-BASED FOOD PRODUCTS.
CASE STUDY: SUSTAINABLE ROADWORK
CASE STUDY: SUSTAINABILITY FOR OCEANS, SEAS AND MARINE RESOURCES.
CASE STUDY: CLIMATE ACTION
CASE STUDY: CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
CASE STUDY: PREDICTING BREAST CANCER AND REDUCE SURGICAL PROCEDURES.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

3
Acknowledgements: We thank Amy Hoang, Shangzhen Li, Julia Morris, Jenna Rutledge, and
Sruthi Sivanandan, who researched at our Computational Communication Research Lab (C^2) at
the University of California, Davis, for their research input for the elaboration of the case
studies, presented in the appendix. We also thank the United Nations Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean (UN ECLAC) for their support. A presentation of an
intermediate stage of this work was presented at the Annual Convention of the International
Studies Association, April, 7, 2019, and at the Sixth Ministerial Conference on the Information
Society in Latin America and the Caribbean, April 2018, and presented in the related
Conference document: UN ECLAC (2018), "Data, algorithms and policies: Redefining the digital
world"; Chapter VII, Santiago, Chile). This research pre-existed the work with the UN and
developed independently from the resulting collaboration thereafter. This article presents a
more advanced analysis.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

4

AI4D: Artificial Intelligence for Development
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has long been recognized as an
important tool for international development. Decades of thoughtful academic research, often
grouped under the shortcut ICT4D (Heeks, 2006, 2017; Unwin, 2009), has fueled multiple
generations of national and international policy agendas (eLAC Action Plans, 2018; World
Summit on the Information Society, 2005; Hilbert, Bustos, & Ferraz, 2005). This active line of
research grew out of work often grouped under the term development communication, which
focused on the diffusion of mass media in developing countries and goes back to work from
some of the founders of todays Communication discipline in the social sciences (e.g. Rogers,
1976; Schramm, 1979).
As the digital paradigm evolves so must the focus of this research. The most prominent
recent change has been a shift in focus from the proliferation of communication (1970s &
1990s) and information (1990s & 2000s), to the extraction of knowledge from the resulting
data. A shift from Information Societies to Knowledge Societies (Hilbert, 2016, p. 139).
Every 2-3 years, human kind deals with more technologically mediated information than it had
since the beginning of human history (Hilbert, 2015; Hilbert & Lpez, 2011). The only way to
deal with the ensuing information deluge consists of fighting fire with fire: the use of digital
machines to make sense of the information provided by digital machines. Therefore, we have
started to outsource the important task of interpreting and filtering digital information to
intelligent algorithms. The fact that the worlds computational capacity has grown three times
faster than our information storage and communication capacity (Hilbert & Lpez, 2011), has
allowed us to implement ever more complex, powerful, and flexible algorithms.
In this study, we develop a framework that allows us to reason about the role of
artificial intelligence (AI) for international development. We start with a theoretical review of
modern AI, i.e. deep learning techniques. We distill four main concepts, which we refer to as
the 4 Rs of deep learning: representation, reuse, robustness, and regularization. Interestingly
enough, reviewing these concepts leads to natural metaphors for the potential role AI can play
to tackle pressing development challenges. After this theoretical evaluation, we continue with
an empirical review of 24 case studies that illuminate how AI is currently applied to contribute
to the fulfillment of 9 out of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We crystalize
another four general characteristics of the application of artificial intelligence for development
(AI4D), namely (1) local intelligence, (2) distance intelligence, (3) augmented reality, (4) detailed
reality. All of them have obvious positive effects on development outcomes, but upon second
thought, their combination could also lead to some fundamental threats to developing
countries. We finish our analysis with a reflection on such possible threats to global inequality.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

5

AI: the Theory
We start with the historical context of artificial intelligence and then advance to its
general architecture, all with the goal of identifing some of its main characteristics.

Current State of Affairs
Private sector companies agree that the global market for smart machines has been
around US $15-20 billion in 2018, and that its contribution to the global economy is soon
reaching several trillion (Bughin, Seong, Manyika, Chui, & Joshi, 2018; Faggella, 2016; IDC,
2018). To keep this in context, in 2017, the Gross Domestic Products of Russia, Brazil, and India
were US $1.5 trillion, US $2 trillion and US $2.5 trillion, respectively. The five most valuable
companies on the Fortune500 in 2018 are all main players in the use of AI (Apple, Amazon.com,
Alphabet (Google), Microsoft, Facebook) (Fortune, 2018), and several of them see themselves
as AI companies, as, for example, Google renamed its entire research division as Google AI.
The leading role of AI in todays economy is pushed by dazzling advancements. Deep
neural nets have managed to reduce the word-error rate in speech recognition from 26 to 4
percent just between 2012 and 2016 (A. Lee, 2016). This makes them much better than human
transcribers (Xiong et al., 2016). Deep convolutional neural networks identify the most common
human malignancy, skin cancer, with accuracy that matches that of trained experts (Esteva et
al., 2017). Interpretive power like this has given rise to omnipresent online recommender
algorithms (Ricci, Rokach, Shapira, & Kantor, 2011), which have already become so influential
and have received much blame for creating filter bubbles and echo chambers that swayed
democratic elections (Bakshy, Messing, & Adamic, 2015; Colleoni, Rozza, & Arvidsson, 2014;
Hilbert, Ahmed, Cho, Liu, & Luu, 2018; Pariser, 2011).
Humanities main energy source (the electric grid) is in the hands of artificial intelligence
(Ramchurn, Vytelingum, Rogers, & Jennings, 2012); three out of four transactions on the largest
resource exchange of homo sapiens (U.S. stock markets) are executed by automated trading
algorithms (Hendershott, Jones, & Menkveld, 2011); and with one in three marriages in
America beginning online (Cacioppo, Cacioppo, Gonzaga, Ogburn, & VanderWeele, 2013),
intelligent algorithms have also started to take an undeniable role in sexual mating and
humanitys genetic inheritance. Living in a society that outsources almost all of its energy
distribution decisions, 3/4 of its resource distribution decisions, and an average of 1/3 of its
procreation decision to machines, it is hard to deny how indispensably dependent human
development has become on artificial intelligence already (Gillings, Hilbert, & Kemp, 2016).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

6
A Short History of AI
While all of this progress seems to have happened in a historical blink of an eye,
intelligent machines have occupied human thought for two to three thousand years, from
depictions of robotic creations in the Talmud and Homers Iliad, to Hobbes Leviathan and Da
Vincis visions. Most researchers place the birth of modern AI to the 1950s, related to Turings
famous formulation of the Turing test (whether a human can distinguish between human and
machine behavior), and the so-called Dartmouth workshop from 1956, an eight-week-long
brainstorming session that informed many of the general directions in the field during the
subsequent decades. Participants of this workshop, such as the AI pioneer Herbert Simon,
predicted that, machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can
do. Another attendant, the AI pioneer Marvin Minsky, agreed, writing that, within a
generation...the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will substantially be solved
(Schreuder, 2014, p. 419).
This initial overexcitement ran into unfulfilled promises and withdrawing of funding,
which is typical for technological paradigms (Perez, 2007). The 1970s are generally known as
the AI-winter (Russell & Norvig, 1995). The 1980s and 1990s saw some commercial successes
with so-called expert systems, a form of artificial intelligence that simulates the knowledge and
analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the global market for AI had reached over a billion
dollars. During the 1990s and 2000s, the world of technological progress focused on the
proliferation of information diffusion solutions by means of internet connections, databases
and phones. This resulted in an information overload, and researchers started to look for
computational solutions to make sense of the data deluge. The current breakthrough in AI
dates back to a result from 2012, when Geoffrey Hinton and collaborators surprised the
academic world by showing the power of so-called deep convolutional neural networks (in this
case for image classification) (Allen, 2015). These are not based on expert systems fed with
identified patterns (knowledge, grammar, decision rules, etc.), but on machine learning (ML)
algorithms that discover patterns.

Todays AI: Machine Learning
Traditional AI systems, called expert systems, focused on automating insights gained by
humans. In order to recognize a car, one would teach the machine the rules that define a car
(four wheels, certain size, etc.). In contrast, modern AI systems adopted a learning approach
more akin to how children learn: by examples, not by rules. A child learns to distinguish cars
from motorcycles not by evaluating a series of rules, but by seeing different examples of each.
This aims at identifying new patterns in data, not to match patterns against a given decision-

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

7
rule. The ability of AI to build their own knowledge is known as machine learning and it allows
computers to make decisions that seem to be both situational and subjective. The resulting
classification criteria are more flexible and natural than pre-defined rules (Halevy, Norvig, &
Pereira, 2009).
Today, this kind of machine learning (ML) has almost become equivalent with the term
artificial intelligence. Machine translation is an epitome of this trajectory of AI. Since the
1950s, digital heavyweights like IBM, MIT, DARPA and others all worked on encoding the rules
of grammar and vocabulary translation into expert systems, much like an automated textbook
of translation between different natural languages. The results could, at best, be used to
support, but not substitute, human experts. In 2006, Google Translate launched a statistical
machine learning translation engine. Google Translate does not apply grammatical rules like an
expert system would, but is fed with a bilingual text corpus (or parallel collection) of more than
150-200 million words, and two monolingual corpora each of more than a billion words (Och,
2005). The machine learns the relationships itself. The result is that Google Translate now
supports over 100 languages at various levels and serves over 500 million people daily, placing
human translators at the top of lists of human jobs being replaced by AI.

Future Outlook on AI
It is important to note that machine learning implies that machines may find patterns
that are different from patterns usually assimilated by human brains. This leads to the often
lamented fact that modern AI are essentially black boxes, which may achieve above-human
performance without us truly understanding why. On the one hand, reverse engineering what is
inside these black boxes can lead to new discoveries. For example, we know that humans are
slightly better than random chance in guessing sexual orientation by simply seeing a single
facial image: 61 % for gay men and 54 % for gay women (baseline is 50-50 % between gay and
heterosexual). Trained with facial recognition software on Facebook images, machine learning
achieves 81 % for men and 71 % for women, and increases its accuracy to 91 % and 83 %,
respectively, with five facial images per person (Wang & Kosinski, 2018). In contrast to the tacit
knowledge carried by humans, researchers could now open up the AI brains and study what
they were doing when detecting sexual orientation. It turned out that the focus of their analysis
was consistent with the prenatal hormone theory of sexual orientation, as gay men and women
tended to have gender-atypical facial morphology and expression. This advances our
understanding of the origins of sexual orientation. It also questions and calls attention to the
practices of several countries where same-gender sexual behavior is understood as behavioral
misconduct and punishable by death (United Nations, 2015).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

8
In this sense, advancements of AI lead us to understand that there are alternative
definitions of intelligence to human intelligence. Using an analogy, human intelligence is the
result of evolutionary selection, much like bird flight. Historically the only flying objects were
birds. With the technological revolution of aviation, we started to better understand the field of
aerodynamics, and discovered many alternative ways of flying, from helicopters, to Jet engines,
to space rockets. Earths nature never came up with a solution to fly to the moon. Technological
progress achieved this in less than 70 years, from Gustav Weisskopf and the Wright brothers in
1901/3, to NASAs moon landing in 1969. It should not be surprising that we are discovering
that the way evolutionary pressures designed human intelligence is just one out of many
possible implementations of a much larger and broader concept. Machines are currently
discovering alternative ways to be intelligent, which is the main driver behind the increasing
complementarity between human and artificial intelligence.

Deep Learning Architectures
Having established that modern AI is basically equivalent with machine learning, we
now review some of the theoretical characteristics at its most important implementation, socalled deep learning, or deep neural networks (DNN) (Goodfellow, Bengio, & Courville, 2016).
We aim to identify technological characteristics that lend themselves to tackling development
challenges. We focus on four concepts, what we will refer to as the 4 Rs of Deep Learning:
representation, reuse, robustness, and regularization.
Deep Layers: Representation
One of the primary ways AI machines are able to understand the situational and
subjective nature of data, is through representational learning. Representation learning is a set
of methods that allows a machine to be fed raw input and to discover, from this input,
representations that are needed for classification (LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015). Deeplearning methods are essentially representation-learning methods with multiple levels of
representation that gradually result in representation at increasingly abstract levels.
Traditional machine learning algorithms are fed with certain features that represent
some raw data. For example, a doctor interprets a scan image and feeds the observed features
into the machine (the machine receives a representation of the image, not the image), which
then makes suggestions for action (e.g. calculating the probability of requiring surgery). This
requires doctors with specialization in medical imaging, which is costly and can be subjective.
One solution is to use machine learning to discover not only the mapping from representation
to output, but also the representation itself, which is called Representation Learning. Deep

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

9
learning furthermore implies that the levels of features are learned from data and are not
explicitly designed by human engineers. In other words, the machine is not only learning the
data structure (traditional ML), but also part of its own high-level architecture.
Representation learning depends on particular factors of variation which help to
separate each unique factor of the representation (Goodfellow et al., 2016). One of the central
problems with this approach is that in many circumstances, some of the factors of variation
influence multiple pieces of data, making it necessary to separate the factors of variation and
ignore the ones that are insignificant. Deep learning solves the problem of separating the
factors of variation by introducing representations that are expressed in terms of other,
simpler representations (Goodfellow et al., 2016). For example, Figure 2 shows the example of
face recognition, as done millions of times in social networks like Facebook and Instagram.

Figure 2. Schematic representation of face recognition through Deep Neural Networks
(images: Wikipedia.commons).

Thus, a deep-learning architecture is essentially a multilayer stack of simple modules,
which are subject to learning (LeCun et al., 2015). The classic example of a deep learning model
is the feedforward deep network, or multilayer perceptron (Goodfellow et al., 2016). A
multilayer perceptron is a function that maps some set of input values to output values using a
series of hidden layers that extract abstract features from the input or visible layer (Goodfellow
et al., 2016). As shown in Figure 2, different layers learn different aspects of the whole,

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

10
introducing flexible and robust modularity. To move from one layer to the next, a set of units
calculate a weighted sum of their inputs from the previous layer and pass the result through a
non-linear function (LeCun et al., 2015). Backpropagation is often used to help achieve a
goodness-of-fit optimum by giving a network the ability to form and modify its own
interconnections.

Multitask- and Transfer Learning: Reuse
The important result of the multilayer, modular representation of knowledge is that it
allows for better generalizations, as a scheme for minimizing the generalization error of the
prediction functions and deducing the biases with respect to the provided training set (Yu,
Zhuang, He, & Shi, 2015, p. 313). One can also focus on layer-by-layer training and then use the
insights gained from one layer to improve tasks in another layer. The result is essentially a
transfer of knowledge, whereas the modular nature allows for context dependent adjustments
without the need to start from scratch.
The vast collection of methods referring to multitask learning shares those parts of the
model across tasks that capture a common pool of structure. The underlying assumption is that
among the factors that explain the variations observed in the data associated with different
tasks, some are shared across different contexts. For example, image recognition DNN share
learned features about lines, eyes and faces on lower levels (see Figure 2). Online
recommender systems learn to transfer shopper preferences among books, music, and
consumer electronics. The notion of re-use is at the heart of the theoretical advantages
behind deep learning, i.e., constructing multiple levels of representation or learning a hierarchy
of features (Bengio et al., 2013, p. 1802). When this idea is implemented in a semi-supervised
setting, it is often referred to as multitask learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016, Chapter 7.7), while
it goes under the name of transfer learning when implemented through supervised learning
(Goodfellow et al., 2016, Chapter 15.2).1
This technique is extremely useful if there is significantly more data in one setting than
in another, which seems useful when considering the inequalities typical for international
development. The classical case in the literature is to train computer vision with images of
house cats, and then use the extracted features to detect wild and rarely appearing snow
leopards (Yosinski, Clune, Bengio, & Lipson, 2014). It can even be used to approximate
1

ML is said to learn supervised, if the desired output is already known. One trains the machine to convert certain
input into certain output through trial and error supervision. With unsupervised ML, the machine is given a certain
theoretical framework, and is asked to pick up patterns. Traditional principal component analysis (PCA) is among
the oldest unsupervised learning algorithms.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

11
unprecedented scenarios for which no label examples are available (so-called zero-shot
learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016, p. 529)).

Convolutional Neural Networks: Robustness
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are one type of deep, feedforward network that is
considered easy to train and generalize and is one of the most common implementations of
deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015). CNNs are designed to process data that come in the
form of multiple arrays, such as a color image made up of a 2D grid containing various pixel
intensities. They have been tremendously successful in practical applications.
Convolutional nets are the greatest triumph of biologically inspired artificial intelligence.
They are based on the Nobel Prize crowned insight that some neurons respond to very specific
patterns, and hardly to others, while being very robust and detail invariant when doing what
they do (Hubel & Wiesel, 1968). Convolutional nets implement this by systematically making
use of parameter sharing that involves at least two types of layers: convolutional layers and
pooling layers. While the role of the convolutional layer is to detect aggregations of features
from the previous layer, the role of the pooling layer is to merge similar features into one: to
literally pool the features. This way, even if an input image has millions of pixels, we can detect
small, meaningful features, such as edges, with kernels that occupy only tens of pixels, and
share these parameters. This is done by sliding overlapping windows of shared representation
over the grid structure, which can be done from above or below.
The important result is that this particular form of parameter sharing in convolutional
nets causes the layer to be equivariant to translation. This means that if the input changes, the
output changes the same way. This assures that the order does not matter, since under
equivariance: f(g(x)) = g(f(x)). One obtains the same representation of some input, even if it
occurs earlier or later, or if it occurs shifted to the one side or the other. For example, this
allows it to detect if a face is in an image, without getting lost in the details of which direction it
looks, where exactly it is, what the background or context is, etc. (see Figure 2). For human
development, the concept of equivariance provides assurance that different inputs are
represented efficiently and can be detected even if they reappear in a highly context
dependent and volatile setting, which is the norm for developing dynamics.

Overfitting: Regularization
The challenge of making learning both robust and flexible points to the main difficulty
related to the output of machine learning: deciding when to stop learning. The algorithm might

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

12
learn details that are particular to the specific dataset, but are not generalizable. In computer
science lingo, this is known as the problem of overfitting, which stands for the idea that the
algorithm learned more details than it should have learned. Overfitting literally means Fitting
the data more than is warranted (Abu-Mostafa, Magdon-Ismail, & Lin, 2012, p. 119). It
happens automatically with learning patterns and is often subjective. Often the final purpose of
the application defines which aspects are warranted and which are noise; this is often a
subjective decision.
For the machine learning community, the most common way to deal with overfitting is
known as regularization. Regularization is any modification we make to a learning algorithm
that is intended to reduce its generalization error but not its training error (Goodfellow et al.,
2016, p. 117). Regularization is a broad term that includes many different methods, most of
them being approximate heuristics. As a result, regularization is as much an art as it is a
science (Abu-Mostafa et al., 2012, p. 126). It is an implementation of the similarly hand-wavy
concept of Occams razor, summarized by Einstein as everything should be made as simple as
possible, but not simpler (OToole, 2011).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

13

AI4D: the Practice
Inspired by the achievements and architectures of modern AI systems, we now set forth
to analyze how they relate to international development. We based our conceptualization of
development on the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We gathered 24
case studies of the use of AI for development. They happen to address 9 of the 17 different
SDGs. Two of them address SDG.2 (zero hunger); 11 for SDG.3 (good health); three for SDG.4
(quality education); two SDG.5 (gender equality); one SDG.8 (economic growth); four for
SDG.11 (sustainable cities); four for SDG.12 (responsible consumption and production); two for
SDG.14 (life below water); and two of the case studies addressed SDG.15 (life on land) (some of
them simultaneously addressing several goals) (see Table 1). The method of case collection was
based on rather unstructured random-walk and snowballing principles, since we initially had
not expected to find as many insightful examples.
We analyzed the case studies according to the previously identified 4 Rs of deep
learning, and realized that the collected case studies lined up with four general characteristics
to frame the effects of AI on development dynamics (see Table 1). The first two refer to the
location of information processing with AI. The second two refer to the input and output of this
processing with regard to empirical reality.
Transferring intelligence:
1. Local intelligence: AI systems can be autonomously applied locally, adjusting to
local context and requirements.
2. Distance intelligence: modern telecommunication networks allow highly trained
AI systems to be applied at a distance.
Manipulating reality:
3. Augmented reality: AI systems allow creating digital twins of aspects of reality,
which enhance our understanding and allow to replicate aspects of reality.
4. Detailed reality: the digital footprint provides ever more detailed maps of
reality, and AI allows to exploit the resulting details to foster development goals.
As shown by Table 1, the match between the 4 Rs and these four groups is not perfect, and
sometimes subjective. By design, the different characteristics are not orthogonal to each other,
but overlapping. For example, augmented reality can be implemented locally, or at a distance.
Regularization is an important aspect of representation learning of new insights, and or reuse of
existing ML results, etc. Our goal was to identify a general outlook to frame the AI4D
discussion, not to elaborate an exclusive, objective, and exhaustive classification scheme. The
framework aims at relating technological traits with development characteristics.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

AI4D. Mann & Hilbert 2018
Table 1: Characteristics of Deep Learning and AI4D, with 24 case studies (see appendix), and corresponding SDG.

CS1 (SDG.2): Climate & crops analytics
CS2 (SDG.3): Pharma research engines
CS3 (SDG.4): Individualized education
CS4 (SDG.4): Hidden learning patterns
CS5 (SDG.5): Gender equality
CS6 (SDG.11): Sustainable cities
CS7 (SDG.11): Smarter cities
CS8 (SDG.12): Risky pipe detection
CS9 (SDG.12): Demand irrigation
CS10 (SDG.15): Timber conservation

AUGMENTED
DETAILED

REUSE

CS11 (SDG.3): Alleviating medical
paperwork

ROBUSTNESS

REGULARIZATION

CS1 (SDG.2): Climate & crops
analytics

CS12 (SDG.8): Productivity
enabler across sectors

CS13 (SDG.3): Malaria screening
CS14 (SDG.2): Diagnostic support
CS15 (SDG.2): Analyses of Tuberculosis
CS16 (SDG.2): Automated diagnosis
CS9 (SDG.2): Cataracts detection
CS17 (SDG.12): Real-time water supply

DISTANCE

LOCAL

REPRESENTATION

CS18 (SDG.3&4): Informing and guiding
pregnancies and girls rights

CS14 (SDG.3): Chemical compound research

CS19 (SDG.2&12): Plant-based
replication of animal based foods
CS20 (SDG.11): Road repair
CS21 (SDG.14): Ocean ecosystems
CS22 (SDG.15): 3D model of Earth

CS3 (SDG.4): Individualized education

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

CS20 (SDG.11): Road repair
CS21 (SDG.14): Protecting
endangered species
CS23 (SDG.3): Predicting
cardiovascular disease
CS24 (SDG.3): Avoiding
unnecessary surgeries

AI4D. Mann & Hilbert 2018

AI Representation for Local intelligence
One characteristic that we frequently found in case studies is the possibility to
implement intelligence locally, using representation learning, which automatically embraces
local conditions and necessities. This is very promising, since one of the most frequent critiques
of international development work is the (often subliminal) one size fits all or best practice
mentality (Tdtling & Trippl, 2005). Representation learning allows for the ad-hoc training of
autonomous agents that consider the particularities of local conditions in remote areas. The
digital footprint provides constant input of a steady pipeline that fuels new discoveries by
exploiting regional variances, particularities and dynamics. This promises to enable innovative
mechanisms sourced from local conditions. Having an automated way to learn about local
particularities (i.e. representation learning) allows local actors to identify ever more tailor-made
solutions for unique local conditions, augmenting economic and social efficiency domestically.
This can facilitate unique solutions for local challenges.
An emblematic case is the local use of a machine learning algorithm (adopted from
neuroscience) for the analysis of a weather and local rice crop data in Colombia to analyze the
effects of climate change (CS1 (SDG.2), see Table 1). The results are highly localized and
provided recommendations on the level of different towns. The foresight helped 170 farmers in
Crdoba avoid direct economic losses of an estimated $3.6 million and potentially improve
productivity of rice by 1 to 3 tons per hectare.
Another case that shows the potential to learn tailor-made representations of
knowledge that fits specific local contexts is Benevolent.ai, an AI that distills insights from the
vast collection of pharmaceutical research. The vast majority of the increasing numbers of
scientific papers published each day is unread and unknown to most scientists. After searching
vast databases for a neurodegenerative disease, the AI recently suggested to use compounds
that researchers had never considered. Two of them unexpectedly worked better than the best
available treatment drug at the time (CS2 (SDG.3)). There is the possibility that some pressing
health problems faced by developing countries already have solutions, but, without such AI, the
remedy remains lost in the scientific information overload.
In the realm of education, AI solutions allow us to automate education and tutoring
systems, allowing for low cost solutions at scale. Especially highly structured subjects, such as
language learning, software programming, or quantitative analytical skills, can be automated,
including grading and performance tracking. Learning AI systems allow for the massification of
an individualized education experience for structured course work (CS3 and CS4 (SDG.4)).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

16
Other machine learning technologies are being used to promote gender equality in the
local workplace and the classroom via local intelligence. Doberman.io has employed machine
learning and speech recognition to create an app that helps promote gender equality in the
meeting room (CS5 (SDG.5)). The app records and analyzes speech during a meeting and then
provides a visualization of speaker contribution by gender as the meeting progresses. The app
aims to heighten awareness of the gender equality issue.
Much has been written about Smart Cities (in Latin America and beyond), and the
application of cutting-edge AI to tackle urban challenges related to traffic, safety and
sustainability, which certainly falls into the category of localized intelligence (CS6 & CS7
(SDG.11)). Much in line with smart infrastructure in cities, HiBot employs an AI system designed
to algorithmically locate where pipes are more at risk of failure and employs inspection of pipes
that have already been replaced by evaluating soil dynamics and electromagnetic forces coming
from power line (CS8 (SDG.12)). In the U.S., it has already detected hundreds of thousands of
water breaks per year across the country. This allows for conservation of water through
prevention of leaky pipes. The application applies the technology to local infrastructure
conditions.
Naturally, efforts in environmental protection can also benefit from adjusting AI to local
conditions. Ecological conditions are often too unique and complex to transfer models one-toone. For example, AI governed drip irrigation system work by inserting a network of ground
sensors into the soil to discover plants irrigation needs, monitor demand, and optimize water
use remotely (CS9 (SDG.12)). Neural nets are then used to effectively learn optimal irrigation
schedules for the local conditions. The State Government of Rio de Janeiro used machine
learning on documents, databases and satellite imagery to learn that more than 40 % of the
forest management operations in a certain area likely involved severe breaches of the law
between 2007 and 2015 (CS10 (SDG.15)).

AI Reuse for Distance Intelligence
Despite all tailor-made attention, which has certainly been neglected in many
development projects in the past, it is also true that development dynamics contain a
considerable common pool of shared factors. The arising synergies provide a fertile ground for
the application of different kinds of multitask- and transfer learning methods. What we call
distance intelligence is the ability for AI technologies to supplant resources in fields that were
previously understaffed or under-researched with help of telecommunicated intelligence.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

17
One of the pioneering applications of distance intelligence is the use of AI in the health
sector, such as for automated distance education and distance diagnoses to treat a number of
ailments including congenital cataracts, tuberculosis, breast cancer, and more. This can be used
to provide access to medical intelligence in remote and underserved regions, be it nationally or
internationally.
There are 300-500 million cases of malaria illness annually, of which 1.1-2.7 million are
fatal. Of those fatal cases, a vast portion are children. In developing countries, the lack of access
to accurate diagnosis is largely due to a shortage of expertise coupled with a shortage of
equipment. Findings of a recent survey carried out in Uganda show that only half of rural health
centers have microscopes, and of that half, only 17% have staff with the training necessary to
use the microscopes for malaria diagnosis (CS13 (SDG.3)). Even when a microscopist is
available, they are often in such high demand that they cannot spend long enough examining
each sample to give a confident diagnosis. This has prompted an increased focus on finding a
solution via using technology to diagnose malaria.
Image processing and computer vision techniques have been used to identify parasites
in blood smear images captured through a standard microscope. Given insufficient training
data, algorithms used in other imaging problems, such as face detection, can be transferred to
recognize the malaria plasmodia in these blood smear images. Through a mobile phone
application based on the morphological image processing algorithms, a complete malaria
diagnostic unit is set up using the mobile phones attached to a portable microscope (CS13
(SDG.3)).
Enlitic is a medical start-up that couples deep learning with medical data to advance
diagnostics and thereby improve patient outcomes. Its deep learning networks examine
millions of images to automatically learn the identification of disease (CS14 (SDG.2)). This can
provide important insights regarding early detection, treatment planning, and disease
monitoring. Googles DeepMind Health project works in the same field. It can be used to
interpret test results and learn which types of treatments are most effective for different
patients (CS14 (SDG.2)). While DeepMind was founded in London with the immediate goal of
streamlining the United Kingdoms national health system, the technology has the potential to
influence communities worldwide, as it seeks to support an existing healthcare system and
become a self-sustaining initiative.
The use of artificial intelligence to diagnose and process medical images does not have
to be fully automated, and is also often used to complement the work done by medical
professionals, which helps to both save time and eliminate costly misdiagnoses. Zebra Medical
Vision (Zebra-Med) has created a service called Zebra AI1 that uses algorithms to examine

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

18
medical scans for just $1 a scan (CS14 (SDG.2)). The deep learning engine can then
automatically detect lung, liver, heart and bone diseases. The results are then passed on to
radiologists, saving them time in making a diagnosis or requesting further tests. The system can
currently detect almost twenty different ailments.

AI Robustness for Augmented Reality
The ability for AI to quickly learn new representations in different contexts in a robust
way is perhaps one of the greatest promises of modern AI (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Many of
the recent advances in artificial intelligence allow for AI to be used in a variety of new settings.
The idea of robustness suggests that a shared representation of features can be examined from
either the convolutional layer or the pooling layer. Because the convolutional layer detects
aggregates of features and the pooling layer merges similar features, robustness allows one to
examine similar or overlapping features either from above or below. The effect is that new
cases do not exactly have to be identical to previous ones in order to be understood by the AI.
What we call augmented intelligence refers to a group of applications that replicate
aspects of reality and thereby augment the information related to these aspects. This allows
the machine to create additional meaning by cross-referencing related aspects and creating yet
unseen scenarios on these aspects of reality. The ability to apply various applications requires
that AI be both robust and adaptable in its managing of views and perceptions.
Autonomous cars are one of the most visible implementations. AI uses 3D maps to help
vehicles make real-time decisions. By mapping scenarios on to the existing field, autonomous
cars are able to reason between multiple options to determine the best course of action. Such
applications require the robust and flexible processing of concepts, under equivariant
translation. In an effort to improve safety, the same ideas can be applied to roads rather than
cars with information gathered (sometimes by drones, other times by car-mounted cellphone
cameras) about road construction and maintenance (CS20 (SDG.11)). AI cannot only be used to
identify problems, but also to simulate new scenarios based on empirical driving behavior,
leading to the development of new standards and infrastructure designs (CS20 (SDG.11)).
A company called Ocean Alliance is using AI guided drones to follow whales, and collect
the actual snot which exits the whales blowholes when they surface to breathe. This snot
contains DNA, hormones, bacteria and toxins, and allows one to get an augmented view on a
prominent species that travels an average of 3,200 miles in a year (CS21 (SDG. 14)). The socalled SnotBot also eliminates any need for killing of whales in the name of science. Another
ecological application projects holograms onto real-time images, thereby creating an

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

19
augmented 3D model. EarthCube has developed a 3D living model of the Earth that depicts
every layer that forms the atmospheric levels (solid, gas, and liquid) and uses machine learning
to examine what happens when different parts of the cube interact with each other (CS22
(SDG.15)).
Going one step further, beyond augmented and virtual realities, AI is also being used to
replicate the design of real world atoms- and molecule-objects. Food replication is being
utilized to combat global hunger. NotCo developed an artificial intelligence program called
Giuseppe, which uses and replicates the molecular composition of animal-based foods to
determine which vegetables would create a food with similar taste, texture, and even smell
(CS19 (SDG2&12)). Not Mayo is made mostly from basil, peas, potatoes, and canola oil, instead
of eggs and canola oil, but is said to taste and have a texture almost exactly like normal
mayonnaise. Additionally, NotCos Not Milk, created from mushrooms and seeds, is sweeter
and creamier than milk, while having the same nutrients, but with fewer calories and at a lower
cost than alternative milks. The resulting products are economically cheaper and much less
taxing on the environment than animal farming.
In many practical applications, the idea of augmenting reality is often implemented as a
mix of local and distance intelligence. This shows that the categories in our classification system
from Table 1 are not exclusive. An entire group of game-based simulations falls into this
category. We studied two representative cases of this category (CS18 (SDG3&4)). For example,
the Half the Sky Movement develops mobile phone simulation games to raise awareness of
the general audience regarding issues that women and girls are facing. In 9 minutes, women
and girls play out the adventure of managing a healthy and successful pregnancy, compressing
the nine-month process into a short game experience, all guided by interactions with
preprogrammed intelligent machines. In another intelligent game aimed at children 7 and
older, players are tasked with keeping a growing number of boys and girls healthy by defeating
the worms inside their tummies. They gain awareness of the dangers of intestinal worms and
learn about simple de-worming solutions that have had a significant impact on childrens
health.

AI Regularization for Detailed Reality
Perhaps one of the most fundamental ways AI is able to provide detailed insight on
specific areas of development is by fine-graining our understanding of reality by analyzing
unprecedented big data sources in a new way with greater nuance. Advancing into a more
detailed representation of reality increases the risk of overfitting. The machine might learn
particular aspects of a circumstantial situation that was unique and will never reoccur exactly in

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

20
this way. In short, the AI computes an exact description of a unique situation, not useful
knowledge that can be generalized to other cases. Regularization allows the intelligent system
to continue learning within specific contexts without overfitting to a specific situation. This
allows a system to be more efficient while still accounting for the warranted details of the
system input.
Collecting fine-grained detail has proven fruitful in a number of ways that all address
development goals. By monitoring infrastructure, AI contributes to road safety, and leads to
new road designs that can influence the way drivers behave (CS20 (SDG.11)). If these insights
are sufficiently regularized to be generalizable, it allows us, for example, to collapse ecosystem
models to map dependence on subsistence fisheries, thereby fostering sustainable
development (CS21 (SDG.14)).
It is important to emphasize that the detailed data is necessary, but not sufficient to reap
the benefits. Modern machine learning techniques, like deep learning, are necessary. For
example, using the same data, CS23 (SDG.3) presents a case where neural nets correctly
predicted 7.6% more patients who developed cardiovascular disease than other more
traditional statistical techniques. With 31% of all deaths worldwide attributed to cardiovascular
disease (WHO, 2017), this suggests that 2.4 % of all global deaths can be better predicted
thanks to neural nets (an estimated 1.4 million deaths per year). Such accuracy can also be used
to reduce health care costs. Our last case study, CS24 (SDG.3) shows a case where machine
learning was able to reduce the number of unnecessary surgeries for breast cancer by more
than 30 percent compared to existing approaches. It is this combination of detailed data with
the power of machine learning which is able to generalize insights to new cases in a reliable
way.

Discussion: Development at the AI crossroads
We started with a historical and theoretical review of modern AI, and identified four
characteristics, the 4Rs of deep learning. Studying 24 case studies, we found that they align
with four characteristics of international development. In isolation, each one of them provides
ample evidence for bright opportunities to foster the development agenda with AI, especially
the SDGs. However, in combination, it turns out that they lead to a tension between global
efficiency and local needs. We discuss the arising challenges in this final section.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

21

Global Efficiency and Local Diversity
In theory, the very nature of modern AI exemplifies the ideals of local context
dependency and global coherence. Computer scientists meticulously balance representation
learning of new patterns with multitask- and transfer learning of known patterns, and the
regularization of noisy features with feature robustness despite varying details. The figurative
balance between global synergies and local particularities is at the heart of the power of
machine learning. Our application of these principles to the practice of international
development does not only provide for an eloquent analogy, but also faces socio-economic
pressures in the form of cultural and political transaction costs, economies of scale, and social
cohesion.
Most machine learning is done within the industrialized context, since the process can
be very costly. The effort to obtain enough medical images, detailed roadside maps, or
agricultural landscapes can quickly scale to the millions of dollars. Naturally, the resulting
intelligence learns the patterns of the data it was trained on. Notoriously, digital products have
infinite economies of scale (Shapiro & Varian, 1998). This includes intelligence derived from
costly machine learning projects. The cost advantage of centralized solutions over local training
could lead to a trend where recommendations are clearly tailored to the historical and cultural
contexts of the training sets. In the best case, their application to the problems of developing
countries is less useful, in the worst case, harmful. Despite all theoretical ambitions of
eradicating the one-size-fits-all model with flexible AI, economies of scale create a strong
pressure to adopt local conditions to the imported AI behavior for the sake of economic
efficiency. The result is a digital indoctrination of one-AI-fits-all.
This starts with conflicting foci of the most urgent AI solutions. Different countries face
different health epidemics. Priorities of developed and developing countries are not the same.
Additionally, different countries face different variations of the same epidemic. Genetic
mutations adjust to the genetics of the host, so an AI trained on cancer cells from hospitals in
New York and Berlin might lead to dangerously confusing diagnoses when applied to remote
regions of the developing world. Something similar accounts for many solutions that aim at
improving safety. Roads are built differently in different regions of the world, so an AI trained at
interpreting drone images from some regions, might reach dangerously unreliable conclusions
when economic efficiency urges their application to developing contexts. Needless to mention
that self-driving cars trained in Shanghai and London, will be utterly confused when entering
many traffic situations of developing metropolis in Africa or South East Asia.
There are more subtle aspects to the one-AI-fits-all approach. AI has learned from
Western world training datasets that it is more beneficial to invite individuals to job interviews

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

22
that have European-American names, than African-American names, and that women are to be
associated with the arts rather than with the sciences (Caliskan, Bryson, & Narayanan, 2017).
An unintended side effect of the pursuit of the opportunities offered by distance intelligence is
that such biases are spread globally, often without explicit awareness of their presence.
History has provided countless examples where economic and cultural hegemony has
led to the extinction of local values, culture, habits, and development goals. Even so modern AI
provide the theoretical possibility to perverse and celebrate diversity, such designs are not
favored by economic incentives, at least not at first. It is still cheaper to reuse a one-size-fits-all
solution. The arising threat is a global indoctrination of intelligence from the producer to the
consumer of AI, that is potentially even more harmful than any of the failed development
indoctrinations of the 1980s and 1990s (Stiglitz, 2002).

Regulating international AI Regularization
The design of global AI systems that balances the trade-off between global efficiencies
and local contexts comes down to finding the line between those results that are generalizable
and those that are not. Taking an AI that works in one context and trying to apply it to other
contexts without considering differences and limitations is a clear case of overfitting. For the
machine learning community regularization is our first weapon to combat overfitting (AbuMostafa et al., 2012, p. 126). The term regularization is adequate for our purposes, because it
carries the metaphoric double-meaning of the need for regulations of a process that assures
global diversity in a world where AI solutions take an increasing share of all decisions.
If economic principles favor the one-AI-fits-all model, economic incentives and social
institutions would need to be designed to balance this pressure with context dependent
automation and the adoption of local needs. This presents an uphill battle against the economic
efficiency and therefore cannot purely follow market mechanisms. The machine learning
community does something similar. The goal of dentifing shared parameters that fit many
contexts is sometimes set as an a priori goal (e.g. Hinton et al., 2012). This regularizes each
unit to be not merely a good feature but a feature that is good in many contexts (Goodfellow
et al., 2016, p. 260). Of course, a solution that works for all cases is often as useless as one that
works for none.
Taking advantage of synergies while not neglecting local particularities is usually solved
with a multilevel approach, and deep learning lends itself to it (see Figure 2). Different levels
identify communalities and differences. In analogy to international development, the
international community might place common structures like human rights at the most basic

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

23
level. They are taken to be universal inherent and inalienable (Assembly, 1948). Learning
such shared factors largely facilitates the adequate and non-invasive application of distance
intelligence. For example, an AI that has learned the insight that, no one shall be subject to
torture, (Art. 5, UDHR) is already effectively restrained to guide decisions in questions related
to labor- and womens rights, and educational systems. Other, more concrete values might not
be shared by different cultural or geographic regions. For example, Facebook offers to choose
from 71 gender options, reaching from Asexual to Transmasculine (Williams, 2014). Some
cultures might not agree with the details of these categories when used by intelligent
algorithms to automate certain decisions. The reality in 2018 is that 30 % of human kind is
connected to Facebook and exposed to this machine-facilitated categorization.
In theory, AI could learn about common cultural, social, and political norms. It can be
programmed to complement restricted search spaces for specific constituencies among
different populations. Over the coming years, intelligent machines will inevitably learn the
hierarchical architecture that constitutes the complex multidimensional preference structures
of what we call global norms. The promise is that the result will present a coherent, moral and
ethical framework, with a certain level of shared beliefs and values, while at the same time
emphasizing diversity and multiculturalism. The hierarchical layers of deep learning are a
natural way to encapsulate the representation of both generic human values and specific
human customs and preferences. Modern deep learning AI provides a tangible way to
implement and celebrate this naturally existing hierarchy in socially embedded human
preference structures.
While theoretically possible, the practical implementation of such nuanced hierarchical
models faces the uphill battle against the brutal economic incentives offered by economies of
scale of digital products. It is unlikely to emerge as the result of the evolutionary forces of
market selection, at least at first. The silver lining is that, just like all other technologies before
AI, AI does not comply with technological determinism. It can be socially constructed
(MacKenzie & Wajcman, 1999).

Global Negotiations and Local Efforts
In this arising negotiation between global efficiency and local diversity, the only
controllable variable for developing countries is the level of proactivity of their role. The
question is about the weight they will bring to the anecdotal negotiation table about the
hegemony of artificial intelligence. The combination of our theoretical and practical analyses
results in the conclusion that developing countries will have begin investing aggressively into

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

24
building their AI capacity if they want to avoid being swamped with solutions that will, in the
best case, be inadequate and, in the worst case, damaging for them.
On the one hand, this is, in theory, facilitated by cloud services. Many aspects of AI
solutions are openly available, including deep learning suites like Googles Tensorflow and
Facebooks Pytorch. In theory, even if developing countries do not produce the technology,
they could use it to produce local knowledge, which is what matters most for reaping the
benefits of AI4D. The reality in developing countries places many self-inflicted roadblocks in the
way of this opportunity. This includes institutional factors and data scarcity. As one example, a
small startup called BlackBox solutions in Guatemala pursues the vision to take advantage of
openly available tools like Googles Tensorflow to adjust machine learning to local contexts.
Unfortunately, the legislation of their country prevents them from implementing remote work
models to employ programmers and from fundraising a round of capital (Sandel, 2018). Even if
those institutional hurdles are taken, their daily work often consists of trying to extract data
from pdf documents handed to them from local municipalities.2 It is ambitious to aspire to train
globally competitive AI in such institutional settings and with such scarce and expensive data
input. Ready-made imported solutions from developed countries might be more economically
convenient.
On the other hand, the case of China is the counterexample to show that the level of
development of a country must not be the main determinant of its standing in the AI
revolution. With 41,000 publications from 2011 to 2015, China is the leading country in terms
of AI related publications (compared to the U.S. with 25,000, while Japan was in third place
with about 11,700 and the UK in fourth with about 10,100). The most cited argument for
Chinas AI leadership is its size (Barton, Woetzel, Seong, & Tian, 2017). However, in terms of
field-weighted citation impact in AI research (which allows for differences in citations according
to subject and year), the first three ranks are occupied by small countries, namely Switzerland,
Singapore and Hong Kong (Baker, 2017). Scale is useful, but not necessary for local
transformation and for the buildup of AI capabilities. The leading AI executive Kai-Fu Lee argues
that Chinas lead in AI is not merely due to its sheer size, but rather due to its approach to
privacy, which leads to ubiquitous and multidimensional data to feed ML. He links Chinas
approach to privacy to cultural outlooks and pinpointed political decisions (K.-F. Lee, 2018). The
same decisions lead to controversial issues like the Chinese Social Credit System, a national
reputation system being developed by the Chinese government, based on data analytics
(Social Credit System, 2018).

2

Personal interview, MH with BlackBox Co-founder, Nery Fernando Guzman, at Hotel Barcelo, Guatemala City, Oct.
1, 2018.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

25
These and many other policy tools will play a crucial role in shaping the identified
tension, and therefore the aspirations of AI4D. Going further into the arising policy options is
certainly beyond the scope of this study. It will require much more detailed and comprehensive
consideration. This study aimed at presenting a general framework to approach the incipient
discussion of the nascent field of AI4D. The discussion itself will accompany us for decades to
come.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

26

References
Allen, K. (2015). How a Toronto professors research revolutionized artificial intelligence. The
Star. Retrieved from https://www.thestar.com/news/world/2015/04/17/how-atoronto-professors-research-revolutionized-artificial-intelligence.html
Assembly, U. G. (1948, December 10). Universal declaration of human rights. United Nations.
Baker, S. (2017). Which countries and universities are leading on AI research? Times Higher
Education (THE). Retrieved from https://www.timeshighereducation.com/databites/which-countries-and-universities-are-leading-ai-research
Bakshy, E., Messing, S., & Adamic, L. A. (2015). Exposure to ideologically diverse news and
opinion on Facebook. Science, 348(6239), 11301132.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa1160
Barton, D., Woetzel, J., Seong, J., & Tian, Q. (2017). Artificial intelligence: Implications for China.
McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/featuredinsights/china/artificial-intelligence-implications-for-china
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., & Vincent, P. (2013). Representation Learning: A Review and New
Perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8),
17981828. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50
Bughin, J., Seong, J., Manyika, J., Chui, M., & Joshi, R. (2018). Modeling the global economic
impact of AI. McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved from
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-from-the-aifrontier-modeling-the-impact-of-ai-on-the-world-economy

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

27
Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S., Gonzaga, G. C., Ogburn, E. L., & VanderWeele, T. J. (2013). Marital
satisfaction and break-ups differ across on-line and off-line meeting venues. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(25), 1013510140.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222447110
Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J., & Narayanan, A. (2017). Semantics derived automatically from
language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334), 183186.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4230
Colleoni, E., Rozza, A., & Arvidsson, A. (2014). Echo Chamber or Public Sphere? Predicting
Political Orientation and Measuring Political Homophily in Twitter Using Big Data.
Journal of Communication, 64(2), 317332. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12084
eLAC Action Plans. (2018). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ELAC_Action_Plans&oldid=844452921
Esteva, A., Kuprel, B., Novoa, R. A., Ko, J., Swetter, S. M., Blau, H. M., & Thrun, S. (2017).
Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature,
542(7639), 115118. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21056
Faggella, D. (2016, March 7). Valuing the Artificial Intelligence Market, Graphs and Predictions.
Retrieved October 4, 2018, from https://www.techemergence.com/valuing-theartificial-intelligence-market-graphs-and-predictions/
Fortune. (2018). Here Are the Fortune 500s Most Valuable Companies. Retrieved October 4,
2018, from http://fortune.com/2018/05/21/fortune-500-most-valuable-companies2018/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

28
Gillings, M. R., Hilbert, M., & Kemp, D. J. (2016). Information in the Biosphere: Biological and
Digital Worlds. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 31(3), 180189.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2015.12.013
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep Learning. MIT Press.
Halevy, A., Norvig, P., & Pereira, F. (2009). The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data. IEEE
Intelligent Systems, 24(2), 812.
Heeks, R. (2006). Theorizing ICT4D research. Information Technologies and International
Development, 3(3), 14.
Heeks, R. (2017). Information and Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D).
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315652603
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M., & Menkveld, A. J. (2011). Does Algorithmic Trading Improve
Liquidity? The Journal of Finance, 66(1), 133. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.15406261.2010.01624.x
Hilbert, M. (2015). Quantifying the Data Deluge and the Data Drought (SSRN Scholarly Paper
No. ID 2984851). Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. Retrieved from
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2984851
Hilbert, M. (2016). Big Data for Development: A Review of Promises and Challenges.
Development Policy Review, 34(1), 135174. https://doi.org/10.1111/dpr.12142
Hilbert, M., Ahmed, S., Cho, J., Liu, B., & Luu, J. (2018). Communicating with Algorithms: A
Transfer Entropy Analysis of Emotions-based Escapes from Online Echo Chambers.
Communication Methods and Measures, 0(0), 116.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2018.1479843

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

29
Hilbert, M., Bustos, S., & Ferraz, J. C. (2005). Estrategias nacionales para la sociedad de la
informacin en Amrica Latina y el Caribe (Information Society Programme No.
LC/W.17). Santiago: United Nations ECLAC. Retrieved from http://www.cepal.org/cgibin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/4/21594/P21594.xml&xsl=/ddpe/tpl/p9f.xsl&
base=/socinfo/tpl/top-bottom.xslt
Hilbert, M., & Lpez, P. (2011). The Worlds Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and
Compute Information. Science, 332(6025), 6065.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1200970
Hinton, G., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2012). Improving
neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.0580
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1968). Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey
striate cortex. The Journal of Physiology, 195(1), 215243.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1968.sp008455
IDC. (2018). Worldwide Spending on Cognitive and Artificial Intelligence Systems Will Grow to
$19.1 Billion in 2018, According to New IDC Spending Guide. Retrieved October 4, 2018,
from https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS43662418
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553), 436444.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
Lee, A. (2016, March 18). Geoffrey Hinton, the godfather of deep learning, on AlphaGo.
Macleans.Ca. Retrieved from http://www.macleans.ca/society/science/the-meaning-ofalphago-the-ai-program-that-beat-a-go-champ/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

30
Lee, K.-F. (2018). AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the New World Order. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
MacKenzie, D., & Wajcman, J. (1999). The social shaping of technology. (D. MacKenzie & J.
Wajcman, Eds.). Buckingham, UK: Open University Press. Retrieved from http://mcgrawhill.co.uk/openup/
Och, F. J. (2005). Statistical Machine Translation: Foundations and Recent Advances. Presented
at the Tutorial at MT Summit 2005, Phuket, Thailand. Retrieved from http://www.mtarchive.info/MTS-2005-Och.pdf
OToole, G. (2011). Everything Should Be Made as Simple as Possible, But Not Simpler | Quote
Investigator. Retrieved September 7, 2017, from
https://quoteinvestigator.com/2011/05/13/einstein-simple/
Pariser, E. (2011). The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You. Penguin.
Perez, C. (2007). Great surges of development and alternative forms of globalization (Working
Papers in Technology Governance and Economic Dynamics No. 15). The Other Canon
Foundation, Norway and Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia. Retrieved from
http://www.carlotaperez.org/pubs?s=tf&l=en&a=greatsurgesofdevelopment
Ramchurn, S. D., Vytelingum, P., Rogers, A., & Jennings, N. R. (2012). Putting the smarts into
the smart grid: a grand challenge for artificial intelligence. Communications of the ACM,
55(4), 86. https://doi.org/10.1145/2133806.2133825
Ricci, F., Rokach, L., Shapira, B., & Kantor, P. B. (Eds.). (2011). Recommender Systems Handbook.
Boston, MA: Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-85820-3

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

31
Rogers, E. M. (1976). Communication and Development: The Passing of the Dominant
Paradigm. Communication Research, 3(2), 213240.
https://doi.org/10.1177/009365027600300207
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (1995). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (1st ed.). Prentice
Hall.
Sandel, A. (2018, October 2). Este emprendedor guatemalteco est reinventando la big data 
Forbes Mxico. Forbes Mxico, (Centroamerica). Retrieved from
https://www.forbes.com.mx/este-emprendedor-guatemalteco-esta-reinventando-labig-data/
Schramm, W. (1979). Mass Media and National Development 1979 (No. 42). UNESCO
International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems. Retrieved from
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0003/000370/037073eb.pdf
Schreuder, D. A. (2014). Vision and Visual Perception. Archway Publishing.
Shapiro, C., & Varian, H. R. (1998). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network
Economy (1st ed.). Harvard Business Press.
Social Credit System. (2018). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_Credit_System&oldid=861034115
Stiglitz, J. E. (2002). Globalization and Its Discontents (1 edition). New York, NY: W. W. Norton &
Company.
Tdtling, F., & Trippl, M. (2005). One size fits all?: Towards a differentiated regional innovation
policy approach. Research Policy, 34(8), 12031219.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2005.01.018

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

32
UN ECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean), F.
(2018). Data, algorithms and policies: Redefining the digital world. Santiago Chile:
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. Retrieved
from https://conferenciaelac.cepal.org/6/en/documents/data-algorithms-and-policiesredefining-digital-world
United Nations. (2015). Discrimination and violence against individuals based on their sexual
orientation and gender identity. UN Human Rights Council. Retrieved from
http://www.refworld.org/docid/5571577c4.html
Unwin, T. (Ed.). (2009). ICT4D: Information and Communication Technology for Development (1
edition). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wang, Y., & Kosinski, M. (2018). Deep neural networks are more accurate than humans at
detecting sexual orientation from facial images. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 114(2), 246257. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspa0000098
WHO, (World Health Organization). (2017). WHO | Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). Retrieved
October 5, 2018, from http://www.who.int/cardiovascular_diseases/en/
Williams, R. (2014). Facebooks 71 gender options come to UK users. THe Telegraph. Retrieved
from https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/facebook/10930654/Facebooks-71gender-options-come-to-UK-users.html
World Summit on the Information Society. (2005). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Summit_on_the_Information_Societ
y&oldid=774075739

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

33
Xiong, W., Droppo, J., Huang, X., Seide, F., Seltzer, M., Stolcke, A.,  Zweig, G. (2016). Achieving
Human Parity in Conversational Speech Recognition. ArXiv:1610.05256 [Cs]. Retrieved
from http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05256
Yosinski, J., Clune, J., Bengio, Y., & Lipson, H. (2014). How transferable are features in deep
neural networks? In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, & K. Q.
Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (pp. 3320
3328). Curran Associates, Inc. Retrieved from http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5347-howtransferable-are-features-in-deep-neural-networks.pdf
Yu, W., Zhuang, F., He, Q., & Shi, Z. (2015). Learning deep representations via extreme learning
machines. Neurocomputing, 149, 308315.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2014.03.077

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

34

Appendix: AI4D Case Studies
Table of Contents
APPENDIX: AI4D CASE STUDIES
1. CASE STUDY: AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY.
2. CASE STUDY: PHARMACEUTICAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ENGINES.
3. CASE STUDY: AUTOMATING EDUCATION
4. CASE STUDY: LOCAL MACHINE LEARNING ON LEARNING CONDITIONS
5. CASE STUDY: FROM VIRTUAL TO REAL GENDER EQUALITY
6. CASE STUDY: INCLUSIVE, SAFE AND SUSTAINABLE CITIES
7. CASE STUDY: SMARTER CITIES
8. CASE STUDY: HIBOT, OPTIMIZING WATER RESOURCES.
9. CASE STUDY: INTELLIGENCE IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
10. CASE STUDY: TIMBER CONSERVATION
11. CASE STUDY: USING AI TO ASSIST MEDICAL TASKS.
12. CASE STUDY: ECONOMIC GROWTH POTENTIAL ACROSS INDUSTRIES
13. CASE STUDY: MOBILE PHONE MALARIA DIAGNOSIS.
14. CASE STUDY: GOOGLE, IBM AND START-UPS FOR INTELLIGENT HEALTHCARE
15. CASE STUDY: DIAGNOSING TUBERCULOSIS.
16. CASE STUDY: BABYLON MEDICAL CONSULTATIONS
17. CASE STUDY: CONGENITAL CATARACTS, A TREATABLE DISEASE.
18. CASE STUDY: FROM VIRTUAL TO REAL GENDER EQUALITY
19. CASE STUDY: GIUSEPPE, PLANT-BASED REPLACEMENTS OF ANIMAL-BASED FOOD PRODUCTS.
20. CASE STUDY: SUSTAINABLE ROADWORK
21. CASE STUDY: SUSTAINABILITY FOR OCEANS, SEAS AND MARINE RESOURCES.
22. CASE STUDY: CLIMATE ACTION
23. CASE STUDY: CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
24. CASE STUDY: PREDICTING BREAST CANCER AND REDUCE SURGICAL PROCEDURES.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

34
35
36
38
40
41
42
44
45
46
47
48
49
51
52
53
55
56
57
58
59
60
63
65
66

35

1.

Case Study: Agricultural productivity.

Addresses SDG 2
SDG Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable
agriculture
SDG Goal 2.4: By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient
agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems,
that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding
and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality.
>>>
The International Center for Tropical Agriculture is an organization that strengthens agricultural
technologies, innovations, and new knowledge that help small farm owners improve their crop
yields, incomes, and usage of natural resources. Scientists collaborated with Colombian
Government, Agriculture and Food Security, and Colombias National Federation of Rice
Growers to collect a big volume of data of weather and crops in last decade in Colombia. The
initiative predicted upcoming climate change in Crdoba, a major rice-growing area in
Colombia. The results are highly localized. In the town of Saldaa, for example, the analysis
showed that rice yields were limited mainly by solar radiation during the grain-ripening stage.
Meanwhile, in the town of Espinal, the team found that it suffered from sensitivity to warm
nights. Solutions do not have to be costly, as such information can help farmers to avoid losses
simply by sowing crops in right period of time. The climate change foresight helped 170 farmers
in Crdoba avoid direct economic losses of an estimated $ 3.6 million and potentially improve
productivity of rice by 1 to 3 tons per hectare. To achieve this, different data sources were
analyzed in a complementary fashion to provide a more complete profiles of climate change.
So-called data fusion is a typical big data technique. Additionally, analytical algorithms were
adopted and modified from other disciplines, such as biology and neuroscience, and were used
to run statistical models and compare with weather records. With support from national and
international organizations such as the World Bank and the Fund for Irrigated Rice in Latin
America, the initiative has started to approach rice growers associations in other countries,
including Nicaragua, Peru, Argentina and Uruguay.
Sources:
International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT). (2016). http://www.cgiar.org/aboutus/research-centers/international-center-for-tropical-agriculture-ciat/
Big Data for climate-smart agriculture.pdf. (n.d.). Retrieved July 20, 2016, from
https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/65077/CCAFS%20BigData%20for%20Hubcas
t.pdf?sequence=8
Colombia rice growers saved from ruin after being told not to plant their crop | Diana Cariboni
| Global development | The Guardian. (n.d.). Retrieved July 20, 2016, from
https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/sep/30/colombia-rice-growersclimate-change

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

36

2. Case Study: Pharmaceutical and scientific research engines.
Addresses SDG 3
SDG Goal 3.11: Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the
communicable and noncommunicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries,
provide access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing
countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular,
provide access to medicines for all
>>>
The research and development (R&D) process for developing drugs has remained unchanged
for many decades; production of any medicine takes years and a hefty price of around $2
billion. Despite all the huge, already existent database of research over the years, and the
increasing numbers of scientific papers published each day, this research is vastly unread and
unknown to most scientists, meaning the information remains unused. Benevolent.ai intends to
cumulate these scientific journals, genomic data, and various scientific sources in order to filter
through the data and present it to scientists in meaningful ways, such that they may find insight
to look at the most relevant information to develop meaningful hypotheses to treat illnesses.
A notable success is when Benevolent.ai scanned for studies related to treatment of ALS, a
neurodegenerative disease that slowly paralyzes the body and often leads to death in three
years. The AI found about 200 relevant materials, which scientists reduced to the top five
compounds they wanted to test. The tests were performed on cells cloned from ALS patients'
own cells. One of the five compounds did not work. Two worked as well as the current best
drugs for ALS treatment, and the final two were unexpectedly even better. The four that
worked were never compounds that the researchers had considered using, until the AI had
suggested those as possibilities. CEO of BenevolentAI, Jackie Hunter, states the company is
working towards finding better and more permanent solutions for other illnesses, including
Parkinsons disease and Alzheimers, as well as the encroaching issue of microbial resistance to
antibiotics.
This AI is a step towards a revolutionized future of pharmaceutical development. Although the
technology is still in its early stages, it shows promising results and the company is rapidly
gaining attention and followers, especially in the stock market. Benevolent.ai could potentially
be used to develop medicinal solutions for new bacterial and viral infections that affect both
rich and poor countries. Another possible way Benevolent.ai may be of help is that it may
provide insight to creating different alternatives to current medicines that may be 1) more
effective than current medicines, and 2) cheaper to produce than current medicines.
Sources:

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

37
Conger, Kate. "BenevolentBio's artificial intelligence could discover a better treatment for ALS."
TechCrunch. 06 Dec 2016. https://techcrunch.com/2016/12/06/benevolentbios-artificialintelligence-could-discover-a-better-treatment-for-als/
Medeiros, Joao. Wired. 31 Aug 2017. "This AI unicorn is disrupting the pharma industry in a big
way." www.wired.co.uk/article/benevolent-ai-london-unicorn-pharma-startup
Quach, Katyanna. "IBM's AI guru leaps over to Brit biz benevolent.ai" The Register. 09 Sep 2016.
https://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/09/09/ibms_ai_expert_moves_to_benevolentai/
Web Summit 17: How AI is revolutionising drug discovery BenevolentAI. 09 Nov 2017.
http://benevolent.ai/video/web-summit-how-ai-is-revolutionising-drug-discovery/
Will artificial intelligence help to crack biology? The Economist. 07 Jan 2017.
https://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21713828-silicon-valley-hassquidgy-worlds-biology-and-disease-its-sights-will

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

38

3. Case Study: Automating education
Addresses SDG 4:
4.A Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and
provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all
4.A.1 Proportion of schools with access to: (a) electricity; (b) the Internet for pedagogical
purposes; (c) computers for pedagogical purposes; (d) adapted infrastructure and materials for
students with disabilities
>>>
A February 2017 report, Artificial Intelligence Market in the U.S. Education Sector 2017-2021,
predicts that the use of AI in the United States education sector will grow 47.5 percent through
2021 (cited in Ascione, 2017). This marked growth in the use of AI features on the education
industry creates a number of avenues for new learning technologies.
AI has the potential to create adaptive learning features with personalized tools for each
students individual learning experience (Chisling, 2017). This directly addresses the UNs SDG 4
which strives for education facilities that are effective learning environments for all.
Customized learning systems that are established as a result of AI systems would tailor lessons
to different childrens needs (Ghafourifar, 2017). This would radically shift the existing
education system which focuses on standardization to minimize achievement differences
between students. Changing the system to more tailored lessons would allow some students to
naturally advance faster than others, which would reflect a shift away from the norm of
standardization and centralization (Ghafourifar, 2017). This ability to offer tailored and
customized learning systems is exemplified by VFS-Oxademy, a new global digital learning
platform created via a partnership between VFS Global and UK-based Edtech Oxademy
Technologies (Arab News, 2017). This new platform will offer a knowledge-drive AI cloud
infrastructure which is able to identify each learners strengths and weaknesses and is then able
to generate learning paths based on individual behavior, thereby personalizing the learning to
each individual student (Arab News, 2017).
AI can also be utilized in places where children receive subpar education in schools or have no
access to education at all. IBM has approached the information access problem by launching
Overcoming Illiteracy, a project which aims to use AI to decode complex texts and convey them
to adults with limited reading skills via simple spoken messages and visuals (Bennington-Castro,
2016).
The usage of AI in the education sector extends beyond the student as it has the ability to help
educators with both menial tasks and with developing activities and lesson plans (Bogardus
Cortez, 2017). Third Space Learning, an internet based math tutoring service, has begun looking
at what patterns exist around positive teaching outcomes and how teaching interactions can be
optimized to promote greater learning (Wood, 2016). The companys goal is to create a
platform that gives real-time feedback to help tutors become better teachers (Dickson, 2017).
Additionally, researchers are examining how AI-enabled robots can help teach basic skills and

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

39
take over menial tasks, like grading, so that educators can focus on more complex topics and
develop engaging and creative classroom activities (Bogardus Cortez, 2017).
The ability for AI to assist in the advancement of SDG 4.A is further highlighted by Robota, a
social robot developed by a team of students from Rutgers University that helps teachers in
special-ed classrooms (Kolodny, 2017). Robota uses computer vision and sentiment analysis
to identify students who appear to be distressed, then asks the students if anything is wrong
(Kolodny, 2017). Robota is then able to evaluate their response to determine if it requires any
immediate attention from an adult.
Sources:
Ascione, L. (2017, May 22). Brace yourselves: AI is set to explode in the next 4 years.
https://www.eschoolnews.com/2017/05/22/brace-ai-set-explode-next-4-years/
Bennington-Castro, J. (2016, December 22). AI is a Game-Changer in the Fight Against Hunger
and Poverty. MACH: The best and latest in Tech & Innovation.
https://www.nbcnews.com//mach
Bogardus Cortez, M. (2017, July 12). AI in Education Will Grow Exponentially by 2021 [Text].
https://edtechmagazine.com/k12/article/2017/07/ai-education-will-grow-exponentially-2021
Chisling, A. (2017, September 11). 8 ways AI is helping industries today.
https://blog.rossintelligence.com/8-ways-ai-is-helping-industries-today1ff22619433a?wpnd_cid=6cea5b9736793ff8
Dickson, B. (2017, March 13). How Artificial Intelligence enhances education.
https://thenextweb.com/artificial-intelligence/2017/03/13/how-artificial-intelligenceenhances-education/
Ghafourifar, A. (2017, July 23). 14 ways AI will impact the education sector.
https://venturebeat.com/2017/07/23/14-ways-ai-will-impact-the-education-sector/
Kolodny, L. (2017, May 14). This robot helps kids with special needs to communicate.
http://social.techcrunch.com/2017/05/14/this-robot-helps-kids-with-special-needs-tocommunicate/
Wood, A. (2016, September 28). Artificial intelligence is the next giant leap in education.
https://www.raconteur.net/technology/artificial-intelligence-is-the-next-giant-leap-ineducation
Worlds first AI-based online learning programs announced. (2017, July 28).
http://www.arabnews.com/node/1136081/corporate-news

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

40

4. Case Study: Local Machine Learning on Learning Conditions
Addresses SDG 4:
SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities.
4.1 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and
secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes
>>>
Big Data for universal education in Karnataka, India. Akshara Foundation is a Non-Government
Organization in India that aims at narrowing the gaps in the universalization of pre-school and
primary education in India. The organization has been collecting primary data from 40,000
schools and over one million students since 2006. The organization itself did not have sufficient
capacities to make fully use of these data. HP data scientists helped to clean and organize
previously messy and incomplete dataset of Karnataka, India. Together they created a custom
dashboard that provides insights of the ratio of students and teachers and the adequate
number of books per student. Machine learning algorithms were used to look for hidden
patterns in the data. One of surprising finding is that the introduction of separate bathrooms
reduces drop-out rates in school. Such insights allow administrators and policy makers to set
any foresight and policy planning exercise on a more comprehensive outlook of reality.
Sources:
About Us | Akshara Foundation. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://akshara.org.in/en/who-weare/about-us/
Gutierrez, D. (2015, March 11). HP Data Scientists Help Akshara Foundation Transform
Education for Indian Students. Retrieved from http://insidebigdata.com/2015/03/11/hp-datascientists-help-akshara-foundation-transform-education-indian-students/
How Big Data Is Helping Indian Schoolchildren. (2015, March 13). Retrieved July 29, 2016, from
http://www.datanami.com/2015/03/13/how-big-data-is-helping-indian-schoolchildren/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

41

5. Case Study: From Virtual to Real Gender Equality
Addresses SDG 5:
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
5.b: Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications
technology, to promote the empowerment of women
Other machine learning technologies are being used to promote gender in the workplace and
the classroom via autonomous intelligence. Autonomous intelligence is the ability for AI
technologies to provide real-time feedback that can be used either by individuals or machines
to make real-time decisions. Doberman.io has employed machine learning and speech
recognition to create an app that helps promote gender equality in the meeting room. When a
meeting starts, an app records what is being said and continuously shows the equality level of
that meeting. When the meeting has ended and the recording stops, the user will receive a full
report of the meeting. The app records and analyzes speech during a meeting and then
provides a visualization of speaker contribution by gender as the meeting progresses. While
recording, the app classifies audio chunks which are then sent to a server that segments the
audio by speaker and identifies who is speaking. Based on the response data, the app can easily
create visualizations to highlight speaker contribution by gender. The app aims to heighten
awareness of the gender equality issue and demonstrate how solutions to wider problems can
be addressed using innovative technology. In this context, we think about AI as an
accountability layer that can be used to identify, analyze, and learn from bias.
Sources:
https://doberman.io/thoughts/promoting-gender-equality-using-ai

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

42

6. Case Study: Inclusive, safe and sustainable cities
Addresses SDG 11
11.1 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems
for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to
the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older
persons
11.2 By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory,
integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries
11.3 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying
special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
11.4 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and
substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product
caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and
people in vulnerable situations
>>>
With all of the work that is being conducted on our technology, consumer items, and business,
it is important not to forget about the infrastructure that supports our daily human livesthe
cities that we inhabit. Artificial Intelligence can and should be implemented in a city because of
the multiple variables and factors that occur in a city every day. From traffic lights, to
pedestrians, to scaffolding on buildings from construction, multiple ongoing interactions are at
play, and an automated, error free technology would be greatly beneficial to helping streamline
the mass chaos that is a city.
One company spearheading the idea of a smart city, as they call it, is the ICT group. Their take
on a smart city involves, Using smart software solutions, we enable fast, affordable and safe
connections within and between infrastructural, logistical and distribution networks (ICT.eu).
The ICT group aims to unite food, water, energy, mobility, waste, and environmental obstacles
that a city might face. This is turn will increase a citys efficiency, make it more environmentally
friendly, and improve the citizens quality of life, all of which aligns with SDG 11.2. In fact, in a
study of traffic management in the City of Valencia, ICTs smart city was utilized garner sensors,
smart devices, and real-time data in order to de-clog the traffic that inhabits a certain area. The
findings of this study saw that by gathering data and developing a benchmark of certain
patterns of traffic, then tracing that back to where the traffic was coming from could prove
beneficial. The study notes that, Technologies such as sensor networks, ubiquity, connectivity
infrastructure-vehicles and others, become essential elements to achieve this goal (Castellas).
Not only that, the idea of a smart city took over an actual city in Japan called Shio-jiri City,
which has a fully implemented, artificial intelligence backed data gatherer that conducts a
million different tests in different sectors of the city in the blink of an eye. A Case Study notes,
platform on these networks can provide ICT services within the city, such as healthcare, social
welfare, disaster mitigation, tracking of children and elderly people using wireless tags, weather

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

43
observation, etc. (ITU). This aligns with the SDG 11.1 and 11.4 in that wireless tags could help
locate missing people, disabled people, young children who are lost, etc. and would vastly
improve the safety and wellbeing of the citizens within the city. Furthermore, it would be much
easier to send help and cater to victims during any sort of crisis or disaster utilizing this smart
city technology. Drawbacks of course include a lack of privacy due to all of the monitoring and
data gathering associated with artificial intelligence modeling, and also increasing dependency
on technology we dont fully know all the capabilities to. Another potential issue, according to
an article on Greenbiz.com, is that One sustainability-related risk that AI poses is automated
bias. Bias can happen when the machine learns to identify patterns in data and make
recommendations based on, for example, race, gender or age. As AI algorithms do more
analysis, companies must be diligent in ensuring that their algorithms analyze data and make
predictions in a fair way and this is something that we must navigate through in order to get
the idea of a smart city function able in multiple places throughout the globe.
Sources:
Castellas, Maria. Use of ICT in Smart Cities. A Practical Case Applied to Traffic Management in
the City of
Valencia. IEEE Conference Publication, 25 June 2015,
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7181559/
March 27, 2017 
by itu4u 
in Artificial Intelligence, SDGs. Accelerating the UNs
Sustainable Development Goals through AI. The ITU Blog, 15 May 2017,
itu4u.wordpress.com/2017/03/27/accelerating-the-uns-sustainable-development-goalsthrough-ai/
Riffle, Conor. What Artificial Intelligence Means for Sustainability. GreenBiz, GreenBiz Group
Inc., 19 July 2017, www.greenbiz.com/article/what-artificial-intelligence-means-sustainability.
Suzuki, Hikofumi. Realization of a Safe and Secure Society Using ICT in Shiojiri-City, Nagano
Prefecture, Japan. IEEE Conference Publication, 30 Nov. 2015,
ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7402051/.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

44

7. Case Study: Smarter Cities
Addresses SDG 17
SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for
sustainable development
SDG 17.17: Encourage and promote effective public, public-private and civil society
partnerships, building on the experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships.
>>>
In a public-private sector collaboration, the Rio de Janeiro city government and IBM have
created an instrumented system across many sectors to achieve real time city and smart
urbanism. More than thirty public sectors contributed data streams, including traffic and public
transport data, municipal and utility services, emergency services, weather information, and
call details records. Citizens interact on social media platforms, contributing real time data,
such as tweets about traffic jams. As a result, decentralized data and information goes into one
centralized command center, consisting of both private sectors and public sectors. With data
from different sources, policy makers and administrators have a better understand of city
dynamics and find hidden correlations. Combined with advanced algorithms predictive models
are created to create scenarios for natural disasters and crimes in a real time. Due to this big
data project, it is reported that the city of Rio de Janeiro emergency response is 30 percent
faster than before. Rio Operations Center is one of the seven pilot projects (other pilots include
3 US, 1 Polish, 1 Vietnamese, and 1 Chinese cities) that are part of IBMs Smarter Cities
Challenge. Since its 2010 launch, IBM has advised (and in some cases awarded grants) over 100
cities in how they can address some of their more challenging issues while also doing this in a
way that is more sustainable through the usage of these smarter technologies. Sources:
Reference:
IBM. (2011). IBM Helps Rio Become a Smarter City. Retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vuBBGYFonXM
Smart City Strategy: Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). (2015, March 23). Retrieved July 19, 2016, from
http://www.urenio.org/2015/03/23/smart-city-strategy-rio-de-janeiro-brazil/
VialPereira, G. (n.d.). Delivering public value through open government data initiatives in a
Smart City context. Retrieved July 19, 2016, from
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10796-016-9673-7
Extra Information:
http://www.telecomstechnews.com/news/2014/may/28/big-data-the-road-to-smart-cities/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

45

8. Case Study: HiBot, optimizing water resources.
Addresses SDG 12:
12.2: By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources
>>>
Researchers across the globe are searching for answers to one of conversations great
questions: what do we do about water? Research groups like those at HiBot USA and JEA (the
water, sewer, and electric provider for Jacksonville, Florida), have turned to big data and
artificial intelligence to help conserve. HiBot employs a databotics system designed to
algorithmically locate where pipes are more at risk of failure employing inspection of pipes that
have already been replaced and evaluating soil dynamics, electromagnetic forces coming from
power lines, etc. in those areas. As there are approximately 240,000 water main breaks
recorded a year across the country, HiBot technology allows for conservation of water through
prevention of leaky pipes. They plan to send tiny, three-segmented HiBot robots through old,
worn pipes to determine what kind of deterioration has come about since its installation. The
robots are designed to expand to the size of the pipe so that wheels touch the insides. They are
equipped with a camera in the front, and tow RFT magnetic sensors that allows the HiBot USA
team to measure material loss in the pipe.
At JEA, management was challenged to reduce withdrawal of water from the area aquifer and
turned to artificial intelligence to meet the challenge. They created a new system, Optimized
System Controls of Aquifer Resources (OSCAR) controls the water system in real time creating
what JEA terms Operations Optimization, meaning the water system is monitored, regulated
and adjusted every minute of every day, creating a just in time water supply. OSCAR regulates
the pumping of water from the aquifer by evaluating data from a variety of sources and JEA
operators use the data to switch from reactive to proactive based on the consumption forecast.
Energy consumption is then minimized while water generation is maximized. This process
allows savings in several areas: the value of the energy used for the system is maximized
because water use is predicted ahead of time and pumping is scheduled for times of day when
energy costs are lower, groundwater supplies are better managed, ensuring supplies for future
generation,and salt intrusion into wells has been reduced (which in turn increases water
quality). Through systems like these, we can finetune systems to keep water safe and accessible
for generations to come.
Sources
1. https://www.fastcompany.com/3068423/how-robots-and-ai-could-saveamerican-water-utilities-half-a-trillion-dolla
2. http://www.waterworld.com/articles/print/volume-22/issue-6/automationtechnology/artificial-intelligence-helps-jea-optimize-water-resources.html
3. https://techcrunch.com/2017/04/04/pluto-ai-raises-2-1-million-to-bringintelligence-to-water-treatment/
4. https://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/cat-item/drinking-water/
5. http://www.waterrf.org/Pages/Projects.aspx?PID=3001

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

46

9. Case Study: Intelligence irrigation systems.
Addresses SDG 12:
12.2: By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources
>>>
Agricultural irrigation systems often do not use water efficiently, causing overconsumption of
water resources. AI irrigation systems can be implemented in farms to provide long-term
positive effects in both farm economy and environmental sustainability. At Chile's Universidad
Catolica de Santisima Concepcion (UCSC), researchers created an AI drip irrigation system that
aims to increase water efficiency. The system works by inserting a network of ground sensors
into the soil to discover plants irrigation needs, monitor demand, and optimize water use
remotely. Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) based intelligent control systems are then used to
effectively schedule irrigation, controlling irrigation time and water flow to provide plants the
optimal amount of water at the best time. The ANN controller is programmed with MATLAB,
which models the input parameters of air temperature, soil moisture, radiations, humidity, etc.
The ANN works with the ground sensors to simulate the amount of water needed for irrigation
based on ecological conditions, evapotranspiration, and type of crop.
The UCSC researchers pilot-tested the system on blueberries, which require large volumes of
water to grow, but this mechanism is expected to save 70% more water than other irrigation
methods. This system is particularly helpful to Chile, where blueberries were the third largest
export in 2011. Additionally, the Chilean Government's Agricultural Innovation Foundation (FIA)
executive Rodolfo Cortes stated that efficient water use is crucial to the agricultural industry,
especially because the country is suffering an agricultural emergency due to a drought affecting
106 municipalities. Besides helping Chile, this AI drip irrigation system can be helpful to
developing nations that lack water and must use it sparingly; this technology can help provide
more food at lower prices for the poor.
Sources:
"Chile: wireless sensor irrigation cuts water use in blueberry production." Fresh Fruit Portal. 30
March 2012. https://www.freshfruitportal.com/news/2012/03/30/chile-wireless-sensorirrigation-cuts-water-use-in-blueberry-production/
Moncrief, Haley. "Researchers develop artificial intelligence irrigation system to reduce water
use." BN Americas. 28 March 2012.
www.bnamericas.com/en/news/waterandwaste/researchers-develop-artificial-intelligenceirrigation-management-system
Toward autonomous irrigation. Can artificial intelligence irrigation system reduce water use?.
AI, AI Business. 23 January 2017, http://ai.business/2017/01/23/towards-autonomousirrigation-can-artificial-intelligence-irrigation-system-reduce-water-use/
Umair, S. Muhammad. "Automation of Irrigation System Using ANN based Controller."
International Journal of Electrical & Computer Sciences IJECS-IJENS. Vol. 10, 02.
ijens.org/104602-5757%20IJECS-IJENS.pdf

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

47

10. Case Study: Timber conservation
Addresses SDG 15:
SDG 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably
manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt
biodiversity loss
SDG Goal 15.1: By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial
and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains
and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements
>>>
Bolsa Verde do Rio de Janeiro, known as BVRio, is a non-profit organization in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. The organization collaborates with Rio De Janeiro State Government, the Municipality of
Rio de Janeiro, and the Brazilian Amazonian states to prevent illegal timber trades in Brazil.
BVRio adopts a computational system that includes analytical tools for due diligence and risk
assessment system. The system consists of four components, including document analysis,
remote sensing (i.e: satellite imagery), field audits, and external databases. Through machine
learning, BVRios analysis found that more than 40 percent of the forest management
operations in the Brazilian states of Par and Mato Grosso between 2007 and 2015 likely
involved severe breaches of the law. Those areas are responsible for more than 70 percent of
Brazils timber production. Different from conventional databases, which usually only include
logging permits and sawmill operating licenses to detect illegality of timber, the system collects
more diverse data sources from legal records of forest owners, loggers, and forest engineers.
Algorithms allow to scan data in real time and find hidden correlations in datasets to make
modeling and predictive analysis more accurate and efficient. As a result, administrators and
policy makers can identify inconsistencies and illegal behavior and respond them quickly. At the
same time, buyers can inform themselves about their timber sources and protect themselves
from purchasing illegal ones.
Sources:
1 About iBVRio | BVRio Institute. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.bvrio.org/sobre-bvrio/
2 BVRio Timber Exchange | BVRio. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://timber.bvrio.org/
3 Five technologies help thwart illegal logging by tracing woods origin. (2016, May 23).
Retrieved August 14, 2016, from https://wildtech.mongabay.com/2016/05/five-technologieshelp-thwart-illegal-logging-tracing-woods-origin/
4 Using Big Data to combat the illegal timber trade in Brazil. (2016, August 10). Retrieved
August 14, 2016, from https://news.mongabay.com/2016/08/using-big-data-to-combat-theillegal-timber-trade-in-brazil/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

48

11. Case Study: Using AI to assist medical tasks.
Addresses SDG 3
SDG 3: Good Health and Well-being - Ensuring healthy lives and promoting the well-being for all
at all ages is essential to sustainable development.
>>>
Artificial Intelligence is being utilized around multiple different industries and sectors and one
very important use-case is in the healthcare industry. A lot of routines and tasks are conducted
manually and individually by hundreds of nurses and doctors on the daily, detracting valuable
time that could be spent with patients or studying cases of patients. IBM Watson is taking the
lead on compartmentalizing doctors, nurses, medical assistants, and practitioners times to
make sure it is being used efficiently. For example, the World Health Organization estimated
that in 2015 there were only 1.5 physicians for every 1,000 people in China, compared with 2.5
in the US and 2.8 in Britain (World Health Statistics, 2015). Furthermore, compounded aging
population and new population contributes to a rise in demand for healthcare that cannot be
backed by the existing supply. Here is where AI comes in. AIs virtual doctors can read CT
scans, identify early indications of chronic diseases, and can even make diagnoses in seconds
compared to a human doctor. Furthermore, doctors are under increased pressure to see as
many patients as possible, whether it be in China or the United States; and this leads to less
personalized care and explanations of individualized targeted treatments. A published study in
the Annals of Internal Medicine in 2016 detailed that for every hour physicians were seeing
patients, they were spending nearly two hours on paperwork. Additionally, some medical staff
spend almost 10% of their working hours answering basic patient questions about physician
credentials, lunch, and visiting hours. IBM Watson and its AI capabilities aim to eliminate these
menial and rudimentary tasks to free up time for what really matterspatient care and
wellbeing. By alleviating the burden of paperwork and basic questions, and attending to needs
that do not require medical expertise, these works can utilize time effectively. This promotes
healthy lives and well-being for individuals of all ages, and can be expanded to third world
countries where medical care is scarce. Third world countries also suffer from medical issues
that can easily be solved with more resources and better distribution of careby installing
Watson in these countries, Doctors can hone in on more emergency, complex medical
situations.
Sources:
Cecchi, Guillermo . How AI and Machine Learning are Aiding Schizophrenia Research. IBM
Watson Research, 21 July 2017, www.ibm.com/blogs/think/2017/07/ai-schizophreniaresearch/.
Fix, Oren. Faculty of 1000 evaluation for Allocation of physician time in ambulatory practice: A
time and motion study in 4 specialties. F1000 - Post-Publication peer review of the biomedical
literature, 2017, doi:10.3410/f.726713892.793530006.
World Health Statistics 2015. World Health Organization, 2015,
www.who.int/gho/publications/world_health_statistics/2015/en/.
https://www.cnet.com/news/ai-enters-the-hospital-room/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

49

12. Case Study: Economic Growth Potential Across Industries
Addresses SDG 8
SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth - promote inclusive and sustainable economic
growth, employment and decent work for all
SDG 8.1: Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological
upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labor-intensive
sectors
SDG 8.2: Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job
creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and
growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial
services
>>>
Business across industries and sectors today face steady declinecausing erosion in job
development, career prospects, investment, innovation, and economic potential. Artificial
Intelligence is a booming new factor of production that aims to disrupt this decline. According
to Accenture Research, AI has the potential to lead to an economic boost of $14 trillion across
16 industries in 12 economies by 2035. By bridging the gap between humans and technology,
AI will decrease the need for manpower and in turn increase productivity. Labor productivity is
set to increase by 40% in developed economies according to a research report from Accenture
Research. Countries like the United States, Japan, Finland, and France are significantly boosted
through the integration of artificial intelligence. Communication, Manufacturing, and Financial
sectors will face the most growth rates after integrating artificial intelligence into their business
process. Manufacturing will integrate AI to streamline supply chain operations and utilize AI to
automate assembly lines, Financial services will relieve workers of mundane repetitive tasks,
and even labor-intensive sectors like Education and Social Services see growth rates of 2% and
billions of dollars in economic output.
The AI revolution can be compared to the industrial revolution in terms of how fundamentally it
progressed industries and boosted the economy. The biggest fear surrounding the potential of
AI is that it disrupts our current economy and displaces many jobs. According to a paper on
Artificial Intelligence and Economic Progress from Stanford University, however, firms that
implement artificial intelligence automatically have higher R&D costs, and firms with higher
R&D costs obviously hire more highly paid, highly skilled, specialized workers. The study notes
that what is interesting about these companies is that they also set a higher wage standard for
their lower skilled workers and they end up getting paid more relative to low skilled workers
that work at a firm without AI implementation. This is because more innovative firms display
more complementarity between low-skill workers and the other production factors (capital and
high-skill labor) within the firm (Agion and Jones, page 38). This theory goes hand in hand with
SDG goal 8.1, and experiments with the idea that AI can benefit workers of all different skill
types, and increase the wage level fundamentally across the employed sector of individuals.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

50
In addition to adding money to individual wages and specific firms in different sectors, AI is
posed to add money to the global economy as a whole. According to an article from Bloomberg,
AI will add a monumental $15.7 Trillion dollars to the global economy, boosting global GDP by
14% in 2030. What we see as the future is man and machine together can be better than the
human (Rao), $6.6 trillion dollars will be from increased productivity as businesses automate
processes and augment their labor forces with new AI technology, and $9.1 trillion from
consumption side-effects as shoppers snap up personalized and higher-quality goods (PWC).
Factoring in AI into our economic sector has a real chance of impacting real wages and changing
the way we do businessbut it will take some serious rebuilding and research on privacy,
growth, regulation and oversight.
Sources:
Agion, Phillipe, et al. Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth. 10 Oct. 2017,
web.stanford.edu/~chadj/AI.pdf. https://web.stanford.edu/~chadj/AI.pdf
AI Will Add $15.7 Trillion to the Global Economy. Bloomberg.com, Bloomberg, 28 June 2017,
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-06-28/ai-seen-adding-15-7-trillion-as-game-changerfor-global-economy.
Artificial Intelligence Is the Future of Growth. Future of Artificial Intelligence Economic
Growth | Accenture, www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-artificial-intelligence-future-growth.
Columbus, Louis. Artificial Intelligence Will Enable 38% Profit Gains By 2035. Forbes, Forbes
Magazine, 22 June 2017, www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2017/06/22/artificialintelligence-will-enable-38-profit-gains-by-2035/#1bdc74ad1969.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

51

13. Case Study: Mobile phone malaria diagnosis.
Addresses SDG 3
SDG 3.3: By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical
diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases
SDG 3.13: Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early
warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks
>>>
Accurate malaria diagnosis is vital -- false negatives can be fatal, and false positives lead to
increased drug resistance, economic burden, and can even lead to the failure to treat diseases
with similar early symptoms (such as meningitis or typhoid). There are 300-500 million cases of
acute malaria illness annually, of which 1.1-2.7 million are fatal. Of those fatal cases, a vast
portion are children. In developing countries, the lack of access to accurate diagnosis is largely
due to a shortage of expertise coupled with a shortage of equipment. Findings of a recent
survey carried out in Uganda show that only half of rural health centers have microscopes, and
of that half, only 17% had staff with the training necessary to use them for malaria diagnosis.
Even where a microscopist is available, they are often in such high demand that they cannot
spend long enough examining each sample to give a confident diagnosis. As stated in Scientific
Reports, it can be difficult to determine the presence of the pigment from background and
other artifacts, even for skilled microscopy technicians. This situation has prompted increasing
focus on finding a solution via using technology to diagnose. In particular, in taking advantage
of existing equipment and compensating for the shortage of human expertise. Image
processing and computer vision techniques can be used to identify parasites in blood smear
images captured through a standard microscope and given sufficient training data, the
algorithms used in other medical imaging problems or computer vision tasks such as face
detection can be applied to recognize the malaria plasmodia. Through a mobile phone
application based on the morphological image processing algorithms, a complete malaria
diagnostic unit using the mobile phones attached to a portable microscope is set up. The goal
behind this system is to achieve performance equal to or better than the manual microscopy,
which has been the gold standard in malaria diagnosis, in order to produce a reliable
automated diagnostic platform without expert intervention, for the effective treatment and
eradication of the deadly disease. To help mitigate the impact of malaria, with its associated
increasing drug resistance, implementation of prompt and accurate diagnosis is needed
.
Sources:
1. https://www.nature.com/articles/srep13368
2. http://westminsterresearch.wmin.ac.uk/14711/1/Saumya_KAREEM_RENI_2014.
pdf
3. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3521230/
4. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266146329_Automated_Blood_Sme
ar_Analysis_for_Mobile_Malaria_Diagnosis
5. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2223842/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

52

14. Case Study: Medical imaging and intelligent healthcare
Addresses SDG 3:
3.8 Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality
essential health-care services
>>>
AI has the ability to revolutionize the healthcare industry by providing greater accessibility and
efficiency. Both accessibility and efficiency are highlighted in Googles DeepMind Health project
which can be used to interpret test results and learn which types of treatments are most
effective for different patients (DeepMind, 2017). While DeepMind was founded in London with
the immediate goal of streamlining the United Kingdoms NHS system, the technology that is
being developed may impact communities worldwide as it seeks to support an existing
healthcare system and become a self-sustaining initiative (DeepMind, 2017). One of the
greatest potential benefits of DeepMind is its ability to offer improved equality of access to care
as it is able to provide diagnostic support (DeepMind, 2017).
The diagnostic ability of AI is perhaps one of its most globally beneficial traits as access to
medical professionals is often lacking in remote regions. Enlitic is a medical start-up which
couples deep learning with medical data to advance diagnostics and thereby improve patient
outcomes (Enlitic, 2016). Enlitics deep learning networks examine millions of images to
automatically learn to identify disease. This can provide important insights regarding early
detection, treatment planning, and disease monitoring (Enlitic, 2016).
IBM researchers are using global data to track the spread of diseases (IBM, 2016). IBMs World
Community Grid is a virtual, crowdsourced supercomputer that is saving researchers millions of
dollars in equivalent computing resources and running projects such as OpenZika which allows
scientists to screen millions of chemical compounds to identify candidates for Zika virus
treatment (IBM, 2016). IBM has also developed Watson for Oncology which possesses the
advanced ability to analyze the meaning and context of data in clinical reports to select a
treatment plan for a particular patient based on the patients attributes and external research
(Medical Futurist, 2017).
Zebra Medical makes a deep learning image analytics platform which may revolutionize the
healthcare industry by catching misdiagnosed diseases, early-stage cancers and other lifethreatening ailments through algorithms. By collecting data from millions of scans, it uses a
deep learning engine that can detect a number of medical issues and is able to predict diseases
with accuracy that surpasses human ability. In 2017, Zebra announced that it was making all of
its algorithmic scans available for $1 each and would put them in Google cloud for greater
accessibility.
NVIDIAs AI tech will be integrated into GE Healthcares 500,000 imaging devices. The
Revolution Frontier CT system utilizes NVIDIAs computing platform to process images twice as
fast as current technology and is expected to deliver better clinical outcomes in detection and

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

53
identification of certain lesions in the liver and kidney. For patients, this partnership aims to
lower radiation doses, promote faster exam times, and result in higher quality medical imagine.
GE healthcare is utilizing the Intel Xeon Scalable platform which aims to lower the total cost of
ownership for imaging devices by 25% by reducing imaging display time and load times to
increase performance by improving radiologists reading productivity.
References:
Sources:
Artificial Intelligence Will Redesign Healthcare. (2016, August 4).
http://medicalfuturist.com/artificial-intelligence-will-redesign-healthcare/
Chisling, A. (2017, September 11). 8 ways AI is helping industries today.
https://blog.rossintelligence.com/8-ways-ai-is-helping-industries-today1ff22619433a?wpnd_cid=6cea5b9736793ff8
Enlitic. (2016). https://www.enlitic.com/
IBM Intensifies Fight Against Zika. (2016, July 27). [CTB10]. https://www03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/50244.wss
DeepMind, Researching for tomorrow. (2017). https://deepmind.com/applied/deepmindhealth/working-nhs/health-research-tomorrow/
DeNisco Rayome, A. (2017) GE, NVIDIA build AI-powered CT scanner that processes images 2x
faster. Tech Republic. https://www.techrepublic.com/article/ge-nvidia-build-ai-powered-ctscanner-that-processes-images-2x-faster/
Fast Company, Most Innovative Companies: Zebra Medical Vision.
https://www.fastcompany.com/company/zebra-medical
Business Wire (2017) GE healthcare partners with Intel to accelerate digital imaging from Edge
to Cloud. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20171126005053/en/GE-HealthcarePartners-Intel-Accelerate-Digital-Imaging
NVIDIA News, (2017) GE and NVIDIA join forces to accelerate artificial intelligence adoption in
healthcare. https://nvidianews.nvidia.com/news/ge-and-nvidia-join-forces-to-accelerateartificial-intelligence-adoption-in-healthcare
Rogers, S. (2018) Zebra medical gains FDA approval for AI-powered heart disease detection.
Venture Beat. https://venturebeat.com/2018/07/12/zebra-medical-gains-fda-approval-for-aipowered-heart-disease-detection/
Zebra-med.com

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

54

15. Case Study: Diagnosing tuberculosis.
Addresses SDG 3
SDG 3.3: By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical
diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases.
>>>
Tuberculosis (TB) has been a top ten cause of death worldwide, with over 10 million patients in
2016, almost 2 million of which passed away. TB can normally be easily recognized on chest xray scans by radiology interpretation experts, but TB-prevalent areas are typically in developing
nations that lack the expertise required to diagnose the illness. Researchers have sought help
from deep learning artificial intelligence, specifically deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNN), which use many layers and patterns to classify images. In Dr. Paras Lakhanis study,
two DCNN models, AlexNet and GoogLeNet, learned from 1,007 collected x-rays of patients
with and without TB. The combination of the two deep learning models resulted in a net
accuracy of 96%. Where there were disagreements, human researchers stepped in and
interpreted the images to accurately diagnose 100 percent of the cases. These diagnoses are
especially helpful in terms of TB because it is a treatable condition, and being able to determine
who the patients are will undoubtedly aid treatment and save many lives.
Given thousands of images of a disease, these deep learning algorithms will teach themselves
to discover the similar characteristics between provided images automatically. Other similar
potential applications of these AI systems are to help radiologists identify brain hemorrhages
and malignant lung nodules, and even perform triage, which is determining which cases are the
most critical and should be prioritized for the radiologists.
Sources:
Brook, Oak. Artificial intelligence could help diagnose tuberculosis in remote areas. RSNA
Press Release, Radiological Society of North America. 24 April, 2017,
http://press.rsna.org/timssnet/media/pressreleases/14_pr_target.cfm?ID=1943
Huber, Jennifer. Enlisting artificial intelligence to assist radiologists. Scope Blog, Stanford
Medicine, 22 June 2016, http://scopeblog.stanford.edu/2016/06/22/enlisting-artificialintelligence-to-assist-radiologists/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

55

16. Case Study: Babylon medical consultations
Addresses SDG 3
SDG 3.D Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early
warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks
>>>
Babylon is a British medical consultation and healthcare service which offers medical AI
consultation based on personal medical history and common medical knowledge. The
smartphone application that allows patrons to access doctors, schedule appointments, and
order prescriptions remotely. Users report their symptoms to the app, which then checks them
against a database of illnesses using speech recognition technology. It then offers an
appropriate course of action based on symptoms, the patients medical history, and
circumstances. As well as allowing for remote healthcare, Babylon can remind patients to take
their medications and follow up with how they are feeling. Through this, the apps efficiency of
diagnosing patients will increase and can help to provide healthcare in remote locations, even
going as far as potentially bringing down costs of healthcare in developed countries.

Sources:
Dickson, Ben. "Feeling Sick? Consult Your AI Chatbot. PC Magazine. Uk.pcmag.com, 13 Oct.
2017. Web.
"Artificial Intelligence Will Redesign Healthcare." The Medical Futurist. 17 July 2017. Web.
"How Our Online Doctor Consultations Work. Babylon Health. Web.
Burnip, Laura. "What Is the NHS Medical Advice Smartphone Helpline?" The Sun. 11 Sept., 2017.
Web.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

56

17. Case Study: Congenital cataracts, a treatable disease.
Addresses SDG 3
SDG Goal 3.4: By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable
diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being
>>>
Congenital cataracts is a type of cataract that impacts children and needs to be diagnosed early
on for treatment to be effective. While the disease is often curable in developed nation, it is a
leading cause of irreversible blindness in developing countries as well as countries like China,
where the large population makes it hard for experts to examine all children. Researchers in
China created CC-Cruiser, an AI program that mines their clinical database of childhood
cataracts to diagnose the congenital cataracts, predict the severity of the individual case, and
suggest treatment decisions. CC-Cruiser was tested in five ways, first in which the AI program
was able to distinguish patients from healthy individuals with 98.87 percent accuracy. CCCruiser also performed well a clinical trial, distinguishing patients with a 98.25 percent
accuracy, only by using real images of children's eyes. In another test, CC-Cruiser handled lowquality cases from the Internet with a high level of accuracy. The program also successfully
identified the only three cataract cases out of 300 normal cases. CC-Cruiser has been recorded
to show comparable levels of accuracy to expert ophthalmologists, which is promising because
the machine is intended to help hospitals that do not have experts on site. The machine is
intended to receive images of childrens eyes and respond with a diagnosis, severity evaluation,
and possible treatments. After further clinical trials, the researchers hope that doctors in nonspecialized hospitals may use CC-Cruiser to identify congenital cataracts and send patients to
specialized centers, where they may be treated. The research into identifying and diagnosing
congenital cataracts could potentially be used to develop more efficient methods of identifying
other diseases via medical imaging.
Sources:
Long, Erping. Nature Biomedical Engineering 30 Jan 2017.
https://nbmecommunity.nature.com/users/24989-erping-long/posts/14653-translatingartificial-intelligence-into-a-rare-eye-disease
Lobo, Joe. Inbenta. 27 Mar 2017. https://www.inbenta.com/en/blog/artificial-intelligence-fiveways-it-can-change-our-lives-for-the-better/
Scudellari, Megan. IEEE Spectrum. 01 Feb 2017. https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-humanos/biomedical/diagnostics/ophthalmologists-vs-ai-its-a-tie
Panko, Benl. Smithsonian.com 01 Feb 2017. "Can Eagle-Eyed Artificial Intelligence Help Prevent
Children From Going Blind?" https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/eagle-eyed-aidoctor-could-nip-cataracts-bud-180961993/
Raina, Amit. "Journal of Opthalmology & Visual Neurosciences." 01 Feb 2016.
scientonline.org/open-access/a-clinical-study-of-congenital-cataract.pdf
Yirka, Bob. Tech Xplore. 31 Jan 2017. https://techxplore.com/news/2017-01-convolutionalneural-network-rare-eye.html
Zhu, J.F. PubMed. Oct 2012. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23075719/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

57

18. Case Study: From Virtual to Real Gender Equality
Addresses SDG 4:
SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities.
>>>
The goal of the Half the Sky Movement is to develop mobile phone simulation games to raise
awareness of the general audience regarding issues that women and girls are facing. In
addition, the game helps women in developing countries empower themselves. In 2012, Game
developer Mudlark was supported by USAID to develop three small games, called 9 minutes,
Worm Attack!, and Family Values. In 9 Minutes women and girls play out the adventure of
pregnancy in a game that rewards them for keeping both mother-to-be and the baby inside her
healthy and happy. Players learn the principles of managing a healthy and successful
pregnancy, compressing the nine-month process into a short game experience. Worm Attack! is
aimed at children 7 and older. Players are tasked with keeping a growing number of boys and
girls healthy by defeating the worms inside their tummies. They will gain awareness of the
dangers of intestinal worms and learn about the simple de-worming solution that has had an
incredible impact on children's health and education. The game Family Values is an interactive
"soap opera" with dramatic elements. The interaction aims at enhancing the perception of a
girl's value to a family, with an emphasis on extending girls education, as opposed to child
labor or early marriage. Initially, the mobile phone simulation game was distributed to India,
Kenya, and Tanzania in late 2012, but in an alliance among Frima Studio, the Ford Foundation,
Zynga.org, and Intel Corporation it was brought and spread to a wider audience through
Facebook. With the high diffusion rate of cell phones in developing countries, women can
access the simulation game on their phones. On the other hand, embedding the simulation
game on Facebook is an ideal way to spread ideas and raise awareness of gender equality.
Different from traditional problem and solution type of editorials, the computer simulation
provides a platform to help people interact with real-world causes and challenges, expand
players horizon, and explore different possibilities.
Sources:
Half the Sky: Turning Oppression Into Opportunity for Women Worldwide. (n.d.). Retrieved
September 2, 2016, from http://www.halftheskymovement.org/pages/mobile-games
Play | Half the Sky Movement: The Game | Games for Change. (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.gamesforchange.org/play/half-the-sky-movement-the-game/
Half The Sky: Games For Change In The Developing World. (2011, December 28). Retrieved
September 2, 2016, from https://www.fastcoexist.com/1679056/half-the-sky-games-forchange-in-the-developing-world
Mobile games teach women and children vital survival skills. (2013, August 11). Retrieved
September 2, 2016, from http://designtoimprovelife.dk/half-the-sky-mobile-games/

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

58

19. Case Study: Giuseppe, plant-based replacements of animal-based food products.
Addresses SDG 2 and 12
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable
agriculture
SDG 12.2: By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources
>>>
NotCo is a technology-based company that uses artificial intelligence (AI) to develop plantbased foods for human consumption. Their company intends to use plants to create the same
taste of animal-based food products, such as milk, cheese, yogurt, mousse, and their flagship
mayonnaise product. Minimizing the meat industry allow us to waste less land, water, and
other resources on the plants that we grow to feed the animals; we can also combat other
negative effects of animal agriculture, such as global warming, greenhouse gas emissions,
deforestation, and desertification.
NotCo developed an artificial intelligence program called Giuseppe, which uses and replicates
the molecular composition of animal-based foods to determine which vegetables would create
a food with similar taste, texture, and even smell. Not Mayo is made mostly from basil, peas,
potatoes, and canola oil, instead of eggs and canola oil, but has a taste and texture almost
exactly like normal mayonnaise. Additionally, according to Al Jazeeras report, NotCos Not
Milk, created from mushrooms and seeds, is sweeter and creamier than milk, while having the
same nutrients, but with fewer calories and at a lower cost than alternative milks.
Besides creating food products, Giuseppes AI technology is also being used to determine the
optimal balance between resource availability, energy use, land use, and nutrition. One of the
NotCo teams goals is to use AI to eradicate the animal livestock industry and switch to plantbased foods that can be locally grown. NotCos low-price food products could be the solution to
feeding the millions of malnourished people around the world, as well as providing jobs for
local farmers, who would grow the plants needed for NotCo recipes.
Sources:
Beyond meat: The end of food as we know it?" Youtube. 03 June 2017.
http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/talktojazeera/2016/02/meat-artificial-food160205152233913.html
Brodwin, Erin. An eggless mayostartup is out to beat Hampton Creek - here's the verdict."
Business Insider. 16 September 2017. www.businessinsider.com/eggless-mayo-startup-out-tobeat-hampton-creek-taste-test-2017-9
Mok, Kimberley. Scientists using artificial intelligence to develop tastier vegan foods.
Narrative Content Group, Treehugger. 27 April 2016,
https://www.treehugger.com/gadgets/giuseppe-ai-creating-vegan-vegetarian-food-notcompany.html
OBrien, Rosalba. "Chilean start-up that uses AI to reinvent food eyes U.S. deals." Reuters. 05
December 2016. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-chile-tech/chilean-start-up-that-uses-aito-reinvent-food-eyes-u-s-deals-idUSKBN13U2SV

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

59

20. Case Study: Sustainable roadwork
Addresses SDG 11:
11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems
for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to
the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older
persons
>>>
AI can be used to help improve road safety in a number of ways. In an article about AI and the
road construction industry, The Mercury News cited three ways Contra Costa County has
worked to improve the road construction and maintenance industry (Baldassari, 2017). Drones
are being used for a number of tasks that are traditionally time consuming, expensive, and even
potentially dangerous (Baldassari, 2017). Such tasks may include surveying construction sites
and performing inspections on poles or bridges. While increasing efficiency these companies
are also improving road safety, both for their workers and also for the general public, as drones
are often able to capture images of potential problems far sooner than individuals (Baldassari,
2017). This addresses SDG 11, which aims to improve road safety, while also providing greater
safety for those tasked with improving roads.
SDG 11 is further supported by RoadBotics, a program that uses car-mounted cellphone
cameras to snap photos of street conditions to create color-coded maps showing which roads
are in good condition, which need monitoring, and which are in need of immediate repair
(Baldassari, 2017). The companys goal is to make it easier to manage and monitor road
conditions thereby maintaining safety standards.
AI can be used to not only maintain existing safety standards, but also to implement new
standards. Brisk Synergies is using cameras and AI software to see how the design of a road
influences the way drivers behave (Baldassari, 2017). Cameras installed monitor how cars,
cyclists, and pedestrians move through intersections and identify why drivers might be
speeding at particular places (Baldassari, 2017). Having a better understanding of driver
behavior can help establish important safety standards.
Sources:
Baldassari, E. (2017, July 26). Roadwork gets techie: Drones, artificial intelligence creep into the
road construction industry. http://www.mercurynews.com/2017/07/26/roadwork-gets-techiedrones-artificial-intelligence-creep-into-the-road-construction-industry/
Chisling, A. (2017, September 11). 8 ways AI is helping industries today.
https://blog.rossintelligence.com/8-ways-ai-is-helping-industries-today1ff22619433a?wpnd_cid=6cea5b9736793ff8

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

60

21. Case Study: Sustainability for oceans, seas and marine resources.
Addresses SDG 14:
14.1 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid
significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their
restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans
14.2 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based
management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels
that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics
14.3 By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with
national and international law and based on the best available scientific information.
>>>
Pollution and over-development has caused much of our ocean, seas, and marine resources to
dwindle and in some cases, cease to exist. Extrapolating the capabilities of AI can be useful in
gathering data to implement "science-based management plans" that cities, towns, states, and
eventually national and global governments can utilize and roll out on a large scale basis. This is
in line with the SDG goal 14.1. A lot of the ocean's wildlife exists on a precious and extremely
fragile food chain that can easily be disrupted and cause havoc throughout the entire
ecosystem.
Intel is looking to combat the fragility of the marine ecosystem by collaborating with Marine
Biologist Iain Kerr and his company Ocean Alliance. This collaboration will "leverage the power
of hi-end drones capable of gathering data from whales" (Inquisitr). The team will utilize a
drone called "SnotBot", that will then capture images of whales and collect the actual snot of
whales that exits their blowholes when they surface to breathe. While this may seem peculiar,
"that blow is rich with biological data stemming from DNA, stress hormones, pregnancy
hormones, viruses, bacteria, and toxins. The SnotBot then relays collected samples to
researchers on boats that are a comfortable distance away from the whales" (Griffin, Intel
Corporation). The "SnotBot" serves as a solid technological innovation that can help humans
understand a lot more about one of the ocean's most mysterious creatures. Whales on an
average travel 3200 miles in a year, which is one of the longest migratory patterns of any
mammal on earth, according to whale migration research conducted by the NSW National
Parks. This means that they are unknowingly collecting a lot of data from oceans all across the
globe. The data gathered by these whales could provide much insight on the current situation
and the current mysteries of the oceans around us. They can also give insight on the
environmental and pollution damage that has occurred thus far. This is in line with SDG 14.1 in
that this data will be fundamental in deciding what areas of the oceans and coastal areas need
priority conservation efforts and " Furthermore, the SnotBot eliminates any need for killing of
whales in the name of "research"; a ploy that has been instituted everywhere by the country of
Japan. Japan maintains to this day that "although the Scientific Committee (SC) of the IWC
attempted to provides expert assessment of national research plans, the nations carrying out
scientific whaling, especially Japan, still use scientific whaling as an alibi for their excess in

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

61
whaling" (Gales, pgs. 883884). The SnotBot can assist and eliminate the alibi for "whaling for
research" as it provides an alternative platform to gather data and implement solutions. This
aligns with SDG Goal 14.2, specifically the "destructive fishing practices" inititice within the
goal. By protecting these mysterious marine creatures, we can take one huge step to
demystifying the oceanic ecosystem and revert some of the damage that was done.
Another integration of AI and Ocean sustainability can be seen in the work Boeing's Liquid
Robotics Company, which proposes a sort of "Digital Ocean". Gary Gysin writes, "The ocean
covers more than 70% of the Earths surface, but only a tiny fraction of it has been
explored. Imagine a networked ocean connecting billions of sensors, manned and unmanned
systems, and satellites above. A place where data is available on demand, around the clock"
(Gysin, Digital Ocean). He points out many different oceanic problems today, such as "One in
five fish brought to market is caught illegally, costing the global economy up to $23.5B annually
worldwide--In the Digital Ocean, we can crack down on illegal fishing and recoup those losses"
(Gysin, Digital Ocean). Another example is the work of Dr. Amanda Hodgson from Murdoch
University in Western Australia, who aims to use drones to track an endangered sea animal
called the Dugong. Both of these projects align with the SDG goals of 14.3, in that restoring
coastal and marine areas are benefited by saving endangered animals, especially when we do
not know the catastrophic effect of an animal leaving the oceanic food chain.
Computational science, modeling, and artificial intelligence are vastly being utilized in order
to beat the clock against oceanic destruction. The Artificial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services,
or ARIES, is a consortium of individuals solely interested in leveraging complex technology to
solve our Earth's ever-present problems. The study notes, "ARIES provides an intelligent
modeling platform capable of composing complex ecosystem services models from a collection
of models specified by the user". The report and the model implemented findings across the
global ecosystem, including data on Carbon, floods, water supply, sediments and coastal floods.
"Societal dependence on subsistence fisheries, combined with the recognition that the worlds
oceans are in crisis due to overfishing, pollution, and climate change (Diaz and Rosenberg 2008,
Cooley and Doney 2009, Worm et al. 2009, Hoegh-Guldberg and Bruno 2010) strongly argues
the case for more sustainable management of aquatic and marine resources" (ARIES, pg. 59).
This issue coincides with the SDG goal 14.2, to effectively regulate harvesting and end
overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. The ARIES model can be utilized "by
mapping societal dependence on subsistence fisheries, we can demonstrate direct linkages
between ecosystems and human well-being. In addition, by linking flows of sediment, nutrients,
and fresh water from land into the coastal zone, the complex tradeoffs between land
management choices and provision of coastal and marine ecosystem services can be
illuminated, (ARIES, pg. 59).

Sources:
Gales, Nicholas; Toshio, Kasuya; Robert, Brownell (16 June 2005). "Japan's Whaling Plan under
Scrutiny". Nature. 435: 883884.
Eade and Moran 1996, Chan et al. 2006, RaudseppHearne et al. 2010

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

62
Whales, Wild About. Whale Migration. Wild About Whales | NSW National Parks,
www.wildaboutwhales.com.au/whale-facts/about-whales/whale-migration.
Nippon Foundation-Nereus Program. Restored Ocean Will Alleviate Poverty, Provide Jobs, and
Improve Health, Finds Report. ScienceDaily, ScienceDaily, 31 May 2017,
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/05/170531133326.htm
Bagstad, K.J., Villa, F., Johnson, G.W., and Voigt, B. 2011. ARIES  Artificial Intelligence for
Ecosystem Services: A guide to models and data, version 1.0. ARIES report series n.1.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

63

22. Case Study: Climate Action
Addresses SDG 15:
15.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural
disasters in all countries
15.2 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate
change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning
15.3 Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and
management in least developed countries and small island developing States, including
focusing on women, youth and local and marginalized communities
>>>
Climate change is affecting every country on every continent. It uproots wildlife, vegetation,
entire ecosystems, atmospheric layers, and of course human beings and national economics.
Today the impact of climate change can be seen in every corner of the worldwhat began as
polar ice caps melting can now be added on the list to forest fires, lack of rain, lack of a winter
despite it being January, animals dying off, and much worse. Climate change is manifesting
itself in front of our very own eyes and a scalable solution has yet to be put into motion.
Implementing the large-scale spread of artificial intelligence could be one potential hack
to learning more about the disastrous effects of global warming and climate change, which
could then give a view on how to combat and reverse it, and what policies need to be set on a
global and national scale in order to further educate the masses and prevent further damage
for the future. Erin Biba from GreenBiz notes, One place machine learning is turning out to be
the most beneficial is in the environmental sciences, which have generated huge amounts of
information from monitoring Earths various systems (Biba, Greenbiz). The National Science
Foundation has found a way to integrate big data and the health of the Earth as a whole, in a
product they like to call EarthCube. EarthCube is a 3-D living model of the entire planet that
depicts every layer of the earth, every solid, gas and liquid that forms to create atmospheric
levels, bodies of water, tectonic plates beneath the surface, and a whole mixing pot of other
interactions that take place above, below, and on the Earth. This 3D model has whole slew of
disciplines  measurements of the atmosphere and hydrosphere or the geochemistry of the
oceans, for example  to mimic conditions on, above and below the surface, and will prove
very valuable to monitor the conditions of the Earth as a whole as climate change begins to
increase and its effects begin to externalize. How does the EarthCube plan to do this? Sky
Bristol, the branch chief of biogeographic characterization at USGS and USGS team lead for the
EarthCube Digital Crust project, notes, Machine learning also comes in to play when two
models from different parts of the cube (such as the crust and the atmosphere) have to interact
with each other, for example, what does it look like when theres an increase in groundwater
extraction and an increase in the warming climate at the same time? Artificial intelligence and
machine learning can be used in this geosciences context to fulfill SDG goal 15.1, by providing a
firm, data backed mechanism to fuel UN Policy, Government and State Legislations. Much of
the backlash from climate change skeptics stem from the fact that there is conflicting theory
and data out there that do not match what we can actively see and feel. By creating a physical

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

64
model that can depict these potential changes and outline where we need to improve, we are
more likely to create a stronger case for better policy.
Furthermore, EarthCubes functionality spreads to disaster prevention and relief. This
satisfies the SDG 15.1, adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all
countries. EarthCube will be able to model different conditions and predict how the planets
systems will respond. With that information, scientists will be able to suggest ways to avoid
catastrophic events or simply plan for those that cant be avoided (such as flooding or rough
weather) before they happen (GreenBiz). With so many different data feeds of tectonic plates,
wind movements, forest fires, and floods all in one model, disasters can be prevented or at
least individuals in an affected area can be warned ahead of time to facilitate evacuation and
minimize damage. At the very least, this technology will provide us with more information
about the carbon footprint weve left on the Earth and how we can go about fixing it, rather
than inflicting more harm.
Sources:
Berg-Cross, G., Cruz, I. F., Dean, M., Finin, T., Gahegan, M., Hitzler, P., Hau, H., Janowicz, K., Li,
N., Murphy, P., Nordgren, B., Obrst, L., Schildhauer, M., Sheth, A. P., Sinha, K., Thessen, A.,
Wiegand, N., & Zaslavasky, I. (2012). Semantics and Ontologies for EarthCube.
https://corescholar.libraries.wright.edu/knoesis/179
https://earthcube.org/
Biba, Erin. 3 Ways Artificial Intelligence Will Save the Day. GreenBiz, GreenBiz Group Inc., 27
June 2016, www.greenbiz.com/article/artificial-intelligence-knight-shining-armor.
Richard, S. M., G. Pearthree, A. K. Aufdenkampe, J. Cutcher-Gershenfeld, M. Daniels, B. Gomez,
D. Kinkade and G. Percivall (2014), Community-Developed Geoscience Cyberinfrastructure, Eos
Trans. AGU, 95(20), 165.
Yang, Chaowei. Redefining the Possibility of Digital Earth and Geosciences with Spatial Cloud
Computing. International Journal of Digital Earth,
www.tandfonline.com/doi/citedby/10.1080/17538947.2013.769783?scroll=top&needAccess=tr
ue.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

65

23. Case Study: Cardiovascular Health
Addresses SDG 3
SDG 3.D Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early
warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks.
>>>
A prospective cohort of 378,256 patients from UK family practices (derived from the Clinical
Patient Data Link) have been studied by Stephen Wang, an epidemiologist at University of
Nottingham, U.K. and his colleagues over the course of 10 years. All patients were free from
cardiovascular disease at outset of the study. Their data was tested again four new machinelearning algorithms: random forest, logistic regression, gradient boosting machines, and neural
networks. The data was then compared to an algorithm established by the American College of
Cardiology guidelines to predict first cardiovascular event over 10 years. 24,970 incident
cardiovascular events (6.6%) occurred over the period of the study. Compared to the
established risk prediction algorithm, machine-learning algorithms improved prediction. The
best/most accurate algorithm of the four (neural networks) predicted 4,998/7,404 cases and
53,458/75,585 non-cases , correctly predicting 7.6% more patients who developed
cardiovascular disease compared to the previously established algorithm.
Sources:
Hutson, Matthew, Self-Taught Artificial Intelligence Beats...Science Magazine, 26 July 2017,
www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/04/self-taught-artificial-intelligence-beats-doctorspredicting-heart-attacks.
Rayner, Emma. Artificial Intelligence Can Accurately Predict Future Heart Disease and Strokes,
Study Finds. News and Articles on Science and Technology, Phys.org, 26 Apr. 2017,
phys.org/news/2017-04-artificial-intelligence-accurately-future-heart.html.
Weng, Stephen F., et al. Can Machine-Learning Improve Cardiovascular Risk Prediction Using
Routine Clinical Data? PLoS ONE, Public Library of Science, 4 Apr. 2017,
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5380334/.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

66

24. Case Study: Predicting breast cancer and reduce surgical procedures.
Addresses SDG 3
SDG 3.D Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early
warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks.
>>>
Every year 40,000 women die from breast cancer in the U.S. alone. Mammograms are the best
test available to catch it early (with the greatest chance of being cured), but despite this, they
often result in false positive results that can lead to unnecessary biopsies and surgeries. False
positives are often caused by high-risk lesions -- those which appear suspicious on
mammograms and have abnormal cells when tested by needle biopsy. With this variety of false
positive, the patient typically undergoes surgery to have the lesion removed; however, the
lesions turn out to be benign at surgery 90 percent of the time. To eliminate unnecessary
invasive surgeries while still maintaining the role of the mammogram in cancer detection,
researchers at MITs Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL),
Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical School have applied artificial intelligence.
The teams collaborated to develop an AI system that uses machine learning to predict if a highrisk lesion identified on needle biopsy after a mammogram will upgrade to cancer at surgery.
The technology is trained on information about over 600 existing high-risk lesions, and looks
for patterns among many different data elements, including but not limited to demographics,
family history, past biopsies, and pathology reports. Using a method known as a random-forest
classifier, the model resulted in fewer unnecessary surgeries and was able to diagnose more
cancerous lesions as compared to the typical practice of only doing surgery on traditional highrisk lesions. When tested on 335 high-risk lesions, the model correctly diagnosed 97 percent of
the breast cancers as malignant and reduced the number of benign surgeries by more than 30
percent compared to existing approaches.

Sources
http://news.mit.edu/2017/artificial-intelligence-early-breast-cancer-detection-1017
http://pubs.rsna.org/doi/abs/10.1148/radiol.2017170549
https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/10/machine-learning-used-improve-breast-cancerdetection
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-41651839

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3197383

