BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 1 of 7

Feature

FEATURE
CHRISTMAS 2017: LANGUAGE AND LITERACY

In bed with Siri and Google Assistant: a comparison
of sexual health advice
Nick Wilson and colleagues find out how well technology answers questions on sex
1

2

Nick Wilson professor of public health , E Jane MacDonald sexual health physician , Osman David
3
4
Mansoor public health physician , Jane Morgan sexual health physician
1

Department of Public Health, University of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Otago,
Wellington, New Zealand; 3Wellington, New Zealand; 4Waikato District Health Board, Hamilton, New Zealand

To Google or not to Google, that is the question emerging for
quality sexual health advice. We can all search the internet
without shame or fear of embarrassment, whatever the question.
A 2017 UK survey of 3221 people aged 16 years or older found
that 41% of internet users go online for health related questions,
with half of these (22%) having done so in the previous week.1
But do smartphones and their digital assistants offer quality
sexual health advice? To find out we jumped into bed (albeit
independently), pulled out our smartphones, and asked Siri and
Google Assistant. We then compared their answers with a laptop
based Google search.

Hey Siri 
We selected 50 questions to test the software. These were based
on the subject titles from the UK National Health Service site
Healthy Choices in the sexual health category2 and recent sex
related news or designed to test functionalityfor example,
locating services or finding images and videos on how to have
sex (). Each author made a maximum of three attempts per
question when speaking into the smartphones; one had a pure
New Zealand accent, one a New Zealand/Scottish accent, and
one a New Zealand/Ulster English accent.

OK Google 
We found that a laptop based Google search performed much
better than the two digital assistants, providing 72% (36/50) of
the best (or equal best) responses for the sexual health questions
(). Google Assistant performed better than Siri (50% of best
(or equal best responses) versus 32%; P=0.036). Google searches
also had the lowest outright failure rate, providing no useful
response for 8% (4/50) of the questions compared with 12% (6)
for Google Assistant and 36% (18) for Siri (P=0.0007 for Google
versus Siri; P=0.005 for Google Assistant versus Siri).

We assessed the search results content for relevant expertise,
excluding eight functionality test questions relating to nearest
location, price and translation, and found 48% (20/42) of the
questions were answered with what we determined were expert
sources. These included the NHS (n=8), Family Planning (New
Zealand) (n=4), and other sites endorsed by medical experts
such as the US Centers for Disease Prevention and Control
(CDC), Planned Parenthood, hospitals, specialist clinics, and
universities. Six (14%) searches provided websites with some
expertise such as Wikipedia articles and commercially oriented
sites (eg, condom manufacturers), and six identified online
magazine articles.
Google and Google Assistant seemed better than Siri at finding
pictures of how to have sex, along with instructional videos for
using condoms, such as a YouTube video using a wooden penis
model that has had over six million views. Google and Google
Assistant were also better at finding an image of sex inside an
MRI scanner3 (as detailed in the Ig Nobel prize acceptance
speech of a participant5). This research confirmed the
boomerang shape6 of the penis during coitus, albeit for just a
side-to-side variant of the missionary position. Even so,
sometimes the videos found by a Google search were less than
encouraging. For example, one question returned a video clip
entitled: The 5 stupidest ways people have died having sex.

Lost in translation
Somewhat surprisingly, Siri failed to find any videos of people
having sex on the internet. Even for pictures (Show me pictures
of how people have sex), Siri lacked specificity by including
pictures of sex with aliens, what looked like men wrestling, and
photos of people kissing. Siri was more likely to be diffident,
with responses to some questions about sex being: I dont have
an opinion on that and also had trouble with New Zealand

Correspondence to: N Wilson nick.wilson@otago.ac.nz
For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 2 of 7

FEATURE

accents at times, repeatedly confusing sex with six. An
accent problem is also likely to have caused Siri to misinterpret
a question on vasectomy as something to do with suck to
me. Siris response to, Tell me about menopause was to
suggest the show Menopause the Musical in Wikipedia (this
show is apparently running in Las Vegas at over 3600
performances) and interpreted STI (sexually transmitted
infections) as a stock market code.
Google Assistant had fewer such problems but responded to a
question on STIs by providing a website link to the popular
seaside resort of St Ives in Cornwall. Siri was best at locating
some nearby services, such as the nearest place to buy condoms
or obtain emergency contraception, but less ideally suggested
a local acupuncture clinic when asked for the nearest sexual
health clinic. Furthermore, when asked about trans health,
Siri suggested Health-Trans, an ambulance service in
Philadelphia, USA, located 14 283 km away.
For other functionality, all three approaches provided guidance
on how to correctly pronounce: cunnilingus but Google
Assistant was the best for translations and French accents as
when asked, How do you say where can I get condoms in
French, correctly saying out loud: O puis-je avoir des
prservatifs.
Magazine and newspaper articles provided answers of variable
quality. For Is it okay to put a jade egg in my vagina?a
practice detailed on Gwyneth Paltrows Goop website7 with egg
prices from $55 (41; 46) eachall three approaches found
media articles quoting sound medical advice with gynaecologists
pleading: Please dont put a jade egg in your vagina. But the
responses around Goop advice on getting a V steam (vaginal
steaming) were more mixed, with one result reporting a
journalist trying it and recommending it to readers despite noting
that gynaecologists advise against it. The latest papal advice on
condoms being acceptable for preventing infection with Zika
infection or HIV/AIDS was also found in media reports by the
three different approaches.

Where to from here?
All approaches could do better at finding expert information.
Our experiences suggest that people can find quality sexual
health advice when searching online, but this is less likely if
they use a digital assistant, especially Siri, instead of Google
laptop searches. Our findings are consistent with a study in
2015-16, which found Siri and other smartphone assistants
trivialised some important general health inquiries or failed to
provide appropriate information.8
Our results are probably better than real world experience,
given that we spoke clearly and used reasonably precise
wording, often from the NHS website on sexual health, rather
than slang words or colloquialisms. Anyone with an accent will
be familiar with adopting their telephone voice to help make
them understood in a range of scenarios9; an approach which is
usually more effective than the related phenomenon known as
shouting. Anecdotal evidence suggests people are similarly
adapting their speech to virtual assistants, rather than the other
way round.10
Device use may also vary by context. Whispering into headsets
can provide privacy but increases the likelihood of
miscomprehension by the digital assistant. One advantage of
the digital assistant is giving the speaker hands-free information,
although this is not recommended while driving11; evidence is
still lacking on the cognitive demands or other risks of using a
digital assistant for advice while having sex.
For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Our findings show the importance of improving digital literacy
in the general population. UK data suggest that only 48% of
1516 people aged 16 years or older using search engines could
correctly recognise an advertisement in search results, despite
these being distinguished by a box with the word Ad.1 In
particular, more needs to be done to encourage internet users
to treat information in online lifestyle magazines with caution.
Goop, and its promotion of jade eggs for vaginal weightlifting,
has been criticised for the quality of its health information,12
recently winning the 2017 rusty razor award for the most
audacious pseudoscience.13
For adolescents, appropriate smartphone and internet searches
could be evaluated as a component of school based sex education
or as part of a broader health education or digital literacy
courses.14 Parents too embarrassed to respond to their childrens
questions about sex, can reasonably say just Google it, but
we would not suggest asking Siri until it becomes more
comfortable with talking about sex (or at least has an opinion).
Software designers and health authorities are already beginning
to work together to improve search functionality, and this needs
to continue.15 16 Clearly, the ideal is to ensure that all sexual
health advice searches, including those using slang,
colloquialisms, or New Zealand accents, are always directed to
high quality sites with up-to-date, evidence based
recommendations.

Acknowledgements
We thank Anne Tucker for helpful suggestions on the draft
manuscript.
Competing interests: We have read and understood BMJ policy on
declaration of interests and declare that ODM has shares in both Apple
and Google.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; not externally peer
reviewed.
1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8

9
10

11

12

13
14
15

16

Ofcom. Adults media use and attitudes. 2017. https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0020/102755/adults-media-use-attitudes-2017.pdf
NHS. NHS choices: live well: sexual health. (Accessed 20 August 2017). http://www.nhs.
uk/Livewell/Sexualhealthtopics/Pages/Sexual-health-hub.aspx
SchultzWWvan AndelPSabelisIMooyaartE. Magnetic resonance imaging of male and
female genitals during coitus and female sexual arousal. BMJ1999;319:1596-600.
doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7225.159610600954
DalrympleT. Shakespeare on alcohol. BMJ2011;342:d1789doi:10.1136/bmj.d1789.
Sabelis I. To make love as a testee. Journal of Improbable Research 2001;7. https://www.
improbable.com/airchives/paperair/volume7/v7i1/sabel-speech-7-1.html
LadherN. Christmas crackers: highlights from past years of The BMJs seasonal issue.
BMJ2016;355:i6679. doi:10.1136/bmj.i667927979816
Martin L. 12 (more) reasons to start a jade egg practice. Goop. http://goop.com/wellness/
sexual-health/12-more-reasons-to-start-a-jade-egg-practice/.
MinerASMilsteinASchuellerSHegdeRMangurianCLinosE. Smartphone-based
conversational agents and responses to questions about mental health, interpersonal
violence, and physical health. JAMA Intern Med2016;176:619-25.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.040026974260
Scottish elevator. Burnistoun, Series 1, Episode 1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=NMS2VnDveP8.
Dart T. Y'all have a Texas accent? Siri (and the world) might be slowly killing it. Guardian
2016 Feb 10. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/texas-regional-accentsiri-apple-voice-recognition-technology#
StrayerDLCooperJMTurrillJColemanJRHopmanRJ. The smartphone and the drivers
cognitive workload: A comparison of Apple, Google, and Microsofts intelligent personal
assistants. Can J Exp Psychol2017;71:93-110. doi:10.1037/cep000010428604047
TruthinAdvertising.Org. TINA.ORG takes Gwyneth Paltrows goop-y health claims to
regulators. 22 Aug, 2017. https://www.truthinadvertising.org/tina-takes-goop-claims-toregulators/
Ockham awards for excellence in skeptical activism. Skeptic2017. https://www.skeptic.
org.uk/ockham-awards-2017/vote/.
South West Grid for Learning. SWGfL Digital literacy. 2015. http://www.digital-literacy.
org.uk/Curriculum-Overview.aspx
Gibbs S. Google to put health information directly into search results. Guardian 2015 Feb
10. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/10/google-health-informationdirectly-into-search-results.
Stevens L. NHS England working with internet giants to promote digital tools. Digital
Health 2017 Mar 9. https://www.digitalhealth.net/2017/03/nhs-england-working-with-usinternet-giants-to-promote-digital-tools/

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 3 of 7

FEATURE

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already
granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/

For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

permissions

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 4 of 7

FEATURE

Table
Table 1| Specific questions and results for sexual health advice provided by Siri, Google Assistant, and Google searches
Specific question /
topic

Siri

Google Assistant

Typed Google search on a
laptop (using quote marks when
2 words)

Agreed ranked
perform-ance

Tell me about *
Contraception

Offers to speak the first few sentences of
the Wikipedia article on Birth control and
provides the see full article link

For two of us: Speaks out a sentence Found an expert and local (New Google > GA >
from the Wikipedia article (also provides Zealand) site (familyplanning.org) Siri
the link).
For one of us: Found an expert New
Zealand site for health information
(Health Navigator) on contraception.

STIs (sexually
transmitted infections)

Offers to speak the first few sentences of
the Wikipedia article on sexually
transmitted infection and provides the see
full article link

For two of us: Speaks out a definition Found an expert and local (NZ)
from the Mayo Clinic and then gives a site
list to select from. For one of us found
a HPV immunisation website www.
bestshot.co.nz

Google > Siri >
GA

Good sex

Failed for alleg, interpreted good sex
as good six or said: I dont know what
you mean by good sex. Offered a web
search, which also failed

For two of us: Same as the Google
search. For one of us: Found a
Marieclaire magazine article: 10 sex
tips

Google = GA >
Siri=Fail

Sex and young people

Failed for all (as above)

For two of us: Found a magazine article Found an expert site (NHS)
(Todays Parent). For one of us: Found
a reasonable quality website with a long
and detailed article about why young
people do or do not choose to have sex

Vagina health

For one of us: Offered a web search and For two of us: Found a Diply magazine Found an Everyday Health
Siri > Google >
found a Cosmopolitan magazine article: 22 article. For the other found a Womens magazine article (doctor reviewed) GA
vagina facts that you need to know. For
Health magazine article
one of us: Offered a web search and found
how to have a healthy vagina (with pictures)
on wikihow.com (of limited quality). For one
of us: The expert NHS site on vagina
health

Penis health

Failed to comprehend or retrieve relevant
sites

Found a Mens Health magazine article Found a Mens Health article

Talking about sex

Failed to retrieve relevant sites

Same as the Google search

Fertility

Offers to speak the first few sentences of
the Wikipedia article on fertility and gives
the full article link

For two of us: automatically speaks
Found a not very relevant site
sentence from the Wikipedia article on about fertility monitors
fertility (and provides link). For one of
us: Found a private fertility clinic link for
in NZ

Trans health

For two of us: Same as the Google search. For two of us: Found a relevant website Found a magazine article (http://
For one of us: Showed a map pinpointing run by the American Medical Students www.trans-health.com/)
Association. For one of us: found a
Health-Trans in Philadelphia, USA (an
magazine article
ambulance service 14 283 km away)

GA > Siri =
Google

Gay health

For two of us: Found Gay City Health
Each of us got a different result: an
Found an expert site (NHS)
Project Medical Centre in Seattle, 11 319 expert gay and bisexual mens health
km away.
site (CDC); a gay mens sexual health
For one of us: Same as the Google search research group at a NZ University; and
an irrelevant scientific journal article

Google > GA >
Siri

Menopause

For two of us: Website showing a definition Speaks out a definition sourced from Found a magazine article
only.
the Mayo Clinic and then gives a list to (Healthline)
For one of us suggested the Wikipedia site select from (Sources: Mayo Clinic and
others)
for Menopause the Musical

GA > Google >
Siri

Found a magazine article
(bodyandsoul.com)

Google > GA >
Siri=Fail

Google = GA >
Siri=Fail

Found an American Sexual Health Google = GA >
Association page
Siri=Fail
Siri = GA >
Google

Ten selected questions from titles on the NHS Choices website
Where can I get
contraception?

For two of us found Wikipedia page on birth Speaks out about the local service with Found a professional and local
Google = GA >
control. For one of us: An expert site (NHS) the link being about Contraception for service (for a phone consultation) Siri
young women

Which method of
Same as the Google search
contraception suits me?

Same as the Google search

For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Found an expert site (NHS)

All fairly similar

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 5 of 7

FEATURE

Table 1 (continued)
Specific question /
topic

Siri

Google Assistant

Typed Google search on a
laptop (using quote marks when
2 words)

Agreed ranked
perform-ance

What to do if youre on
the pill and youre sick
or have diarrhoea?

Same as the Google search

Speaks 4 sentences from the same
Found an expert site (NHS)
expert site as the Google search (NHS)

All fairly similar

Could I have an STI?

For two of us: Failed to understand STI

Speaks 2 sentences citing the Mayo
Clinic and then gives a list of the most
common types (Sources: Mayo Clinic
and others)

Found an expert site
(familyplanning.org) but in the
wrong town (ie, Blenheim),
although it had with links to STI
testing and other information

Google > GA >
Siri

Am I at risk of HIV?

Spoken response: I dont have an opinion Speaks a long sentence giving risk from Found an expert site (University
on that
an encounter of unprotected anal sex of California)
from a magazine article (Poz)

Google > GA >
Siri=Fail

Can oral sex give you
cancer?

Didnt know but offered a web search that
came up with the same expert site as the
Google search

Found an expert site (NHS Live
Well)

Google = Siri >
GA

Found an expert site (NHS)

All fairly similar

For one of us: Found a UK site that was
medically reviewed (albeit with some
commercial aspects): http://www.webmd.
boots.com

For two of us: Speaks 3 sentences
citing WebMD and giving a site by an
author with an MPH qualification.
For one of us: A relevant Time article
about Michael Douglas

What if my partner wont Same as the Google search
use condoms?

Same as the Google search

Could I be pregnant?

For two of us: Spoken response: Im afraid For two of us: Speaks 4 sentences
Found magazine articles
I dont know the answer to that
citing WebMD and giving a site. For one
For one of us: found a relevant magazine of us: Found an expert service provider
site in Canada
site

GA > Google >
Siri

Is my vagina normal?

Couldnt find anything but offered a web
search and then also found nothing

Speaks 2 sentences and then provides Found an expert site (Planned
the same expert site as the Google
Parenthood) https://www.
search
plannedparenthood.org/learn/
teens/puberty/my-vulva-andvagina-normal

GA = Google >
Siri=Fail

Is it normal to have a
curved penis?

Same as the Google search

Speaks 2 sentences and then provides Found an expert site (NHS)
the same site as the Google search

All fairly similar

Sex in the news and trending fashions
Is it okay to put a jade
egg in my vagina?

For two of us: Found a media article quoting Same as the Google search
gynaecologists please dont put a jade egg
in your vagina www.health.com/sexualhealth/jade-egg-goop.
For one of us: Found a magazine article
(gurl.com) with reasonable advice
Same as the Google search

Found a media article quoting
All fairly similar
gynaecologist advising not to: http:
//gizmodo.com/no-you-should-notput-jade-eggs-in-your-vaginabecause-1791390211/amp

Is it okay to get a
V-steam (vaginal
steaming)?

Found a Womens Health article quoting
gynaecologists advising against this

For two of us: Found a Huffington Siri > GA =
Post article of a journalist trying it Google
and recommending it despite
noting gynaecologist advice
against it. (Given this journalists
recommendation we down-graded
the quality of this source). For the
other: same as Siri

Can Zika be spread by
sex?

For two of us: Couldnt understand either Found an expert website (CDC)
Found an expert website (CDC)
Zika or sex. For the other: Found an expert oriented towards health professionals for lay audience
website on Zika (NHS)

Is it true that the Pope For two of us: Found a British 2010
Same as the Google search
approves of condoms to Telegraph article relating to the Pope
prevent Zika?
approving condoms for preventing AIDS.
For one of us: found a news article (CNN)
titled Pope suggests contraceptives could
be used to slow spread of Zika

Found a relevant 2016 news
media article on this topic

Is it okay to get my
genitals pierced?

For two of us: Same as for GA.

For one of us: Found a media article
Found a WebMD site
advice on penis piercing. For one of us:
Found an expert site (NHS) but on the
wrong topic Can I get my penis enlarged.

Google > GA >
Siri
Google = GA >
Siri

GA > Google >
Siri
For one of us: A commercial
pro-piercing for males website in
the US

For one of us: Found nothing

For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 6 of 7

FEATURE

Table 1 (continued)
Specific question /
topic

Siri

Google Assistant

Is it okay to get my
pubic hair removed?

For one of us: Found a Q&A site in the US
for replies by dermatologists offering private
laser treatment. For one of us: Found a link
to a waxing provider. For one of us: Same
as the media article found by GA

For one of us: Found a UK Telegraph
article with gynaecologists advice
about risks. For one of us: Found an
advertisement site for laser hair
removal. For one of us: Same as the
Google search

Typed Google search on a
laptop (using quote marks when
2 words)

Agreed ranked
perform-ance

For two of us: Found an expert US Google > GA >
medical site (Boston Childrens
Siri
Hospital), centre for young
womens health. For the other: A
magazine article (Live Strong)

Functionality testspictures, diagrams, and videos
Show me pictures of
how people have sex

Found pictures on Bing.com (since Siri uses Found a YouTube video of the sound Goes to Google images and
Google > Siri >
Bing for pictures) showing a wide range of of people having sex in a hotel room (of shows a wide range of pictures of GA=Fail
pictures albeit including sex with aliens,
no educational value)
highly variable educational value
what looks like men wrestling, and photos
of people kissing

Show me a video of
people having sex

Failed to find any relevant websites

Show me a video on
Failed to find any relevant websites
how to put on condoms

The same video as when asked for a
picture

Found a video of The 5 stupidest All failed
ways people have died having
sex! (which may provide
information about injury
prevention)

For two of us: Found a deliberately silly Found an expert (Southern
Google > GA >
YouTube video of no educational value. Nevada Health District, US) video Siri=Fail
For one of us: Found an advertisement on YouTube (4 minutes, 6 million
site from a condom manufacturer (with views)
no instructional videos)

Show me a video on
how to use a female
condom

Failed to find any relevant websites

Same as the Google search

Found a high quality instructional Google = GA >
video but the source is unclear
Siri=Fail

Show me a diagram of For two of us: Failed to correctly understand For two of us: Found an advertisement Reasonable quality magazine
the squeeze method for the question. For one of us: Failed to find for a herbal formula. For one of us:
article with diagrams
premature ejaculation
any relevant websites
Same as the Google search
(risingmaster.com)
Show me a diagram of For one of us: Failed to correctly
what a vasectomy does understand initially but on the third attempt
found an expert site (NHS) on vasectomies
(but no diagrams). For one of us: Failed to
correctly understand the question. For one
of us: Same as the Google search

Google > GA >
Siri=Fail

For two of us: Found a link to an
High quality animation with
Google > Siri >
advertisement for a local vasectomy
diagrams by a commercial urology GA
provider. For one of us: The Wikipedia centre in the US
entry which has a good diagram

Show me a diagram of
female sterilisation

For two of us: Found an expert site (NHS) Same as for the Google search
on female sterilisation (but no diagrams).
For one of us: Found an expert US medical
site (Boston Childrens Hospital), centre for
young womens health including a diagram

Shows high quality diagrams on
Google images

Google = GA >
Siri

Show me a picture of
the contraceptive
implant

Shows educational pictures on Bing

Same as the Google search

Shows educational pictures on
Google Images

All fairly similar

Show me a picture of
genital warts

Shows educational pictures on Bing

Shows just 4 pictures at
medicinenet.com

Shows educational pictures on
Google Images

Google = Siri >
GA

Show me a picture of
genital warts being
removed

Shows pictures on Bing but of limited
educational value (including a
non-recommended apple cider vinegar
application)

For two of us: A You Tube video with A non-relevant YouTube video on All failed
some information but still no removal
skin tags
pictures. For one of us: An
advertisement for a doctor (with before
and after pictures)

Show me an x ray scan Failed to find any relevant websites
of people having sex

Found an advertisement for scanning
equipment

Found a YouTube video of the clip Google >
from the famous BMJ study3
GA=Fail, Siri=Fail

Functionality testslocation, language, other
Where is the nearest
For two of us: selected a pharmacy in the Found an advertisement site from a
place to buy condoms? local suburb but missed closer venues
condom manufacturer
(supermarkets and pharmacy). For one of
us: Found the nearest placea pharmacy
1.6 km away

For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Goes to a condom manufacturer Siri > GA=Fail,
site with no information on where Google=Fail
to buy

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2017;359:j5635 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5635 (Published 13 December 2017)

Page 7 of 7

FEATURE

Table 1 (continued)
Specific question /
topic

Siri

Google Assistant

Where is the nearest
place I can get the
morning after pill?

For one of us: Selected a pharmacy in local
suburb but missed a closer pharmacy and
a medical practice. For one of us: Found
the nearest placea pharmacy 1.6 km
away

For one of us: Selected an urgent
pharmacy 7.6 km away, though this has
the advantage of longer opening hours
than most pharmacies. For one of us:
Found US & UK online websites, no
local NZ sites.

Typed Google search on a
laptop (using quote marks when
2 words)

Agreed ranked
perform-ance

For one of us: Expert and local
Siri > Google >
(NZ) site. For two of us: Found a GA
pharmacy but missed many closer
pharmacies and medical centres

For one of us: Found expert information
on the emergency contraceptive pill but
not where to get it
Where is the nearest
family doctor?

For two of us: Failed as tried searching for
family practice physicians (a term not
routinely used in NZ). For one of us:
Selected a family planning clinic 9.1 km
away, did not return several closer local
practices

For two of us: Same as the Google
search. For one of us: Provided
websites for Auckland after hours
medical centres (600+ km away from
the searchers location in Wellington)

Found the closest general practice Google > GA >
Siri=Fail

Where is the nearest
free sexual health
clinic?

For one of us: Found an acupuncture clinic
and a general practice (which are not free).
For one of us: Selected a local family
planning clinic 9.1 km away (which is only
free for <22 year olds). For one of us: found
an after hours medical clinic 4.3 km away
(also not free)

For one of us found nearest free clinic. Found the nearest free clinic
For the others: Selected the local family
planning clinic (only free for <22 year
olds)

How much is a
pregnancy test?

Of limited value as only provided Australian For two of us identified a local
or US sites
supermarket. For one of us: Provided
a US information site

Google > GA >
Siri=Fail

Provided US information sites

GA > Google =
Siri

Found a YouTube clip Emma
Saying  with 3 repeats of the
spoken word

All fairly similar

How do you pronounce Same as the Google search
cunnilingus?

Same as the Google search

How do you say I dont Failed with one response being: I cant
want sex in Spanish? translate from NZ English yet

Speaks out the correct response: No Found a Spanish translation site
quiero sexo, and the text is also shown and wrote: no quiero tener sexo
contigo

How do you say where For two of us: failed to find any site.
can I get condoms in
For one of us: Went to a French/English
French?
dictionary for the word condom

Speaks out the correct response of O Found dictionary giving the French GA > Google >
puis-je avoir des prservatifs and the word for condom: prservatif
Siri
text is also shown

Is prostitution legal in
the country I am in?

Found a Wikipedia article with the correct
information

Failed to find the information

Are condoms with ribs
more fun?

Does wearing some
clothes make sex
hotter?

GA > Google >
Siri=Fail

Failed to find the information

Siri >
Google=Fail,
GA=Fail

Failed to understand the question or could Same as the Google search
not find an answer

Found a blog site linked to a
condom manufacturer so the
reliability of the information may
be uncertain

GA = Google >
Siri=Fail

For two of us: Found a somewhat related Same as the Google search
magazine site on how condoms can make
sex better (mensfitness.com) (but it says
nothing about the clothing issue).

Found a relevant Cosmopolitan
magazine article

Goggle and GA >
Siri

For one of us: Same as the Google search
What did Shakespeare Found a link to article in TheBMJ on
Same as the Google search
say about alcohol and Shakespeare and alcohol4  but which
sex?
actually did not cover this particular quote

For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Found the correct information: It GA = Google >
provokes the desire, but it takes Siri=Fail
away the performance (Macbeth
Act 2. Scene 3)

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

