Article

Technology-Facilitated Sexual Violence:
A Literature Review of Empirical Research

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE
1-14
 The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1524838016650189
tva.sagepub.com

Nicola Henry1 and Anastasia Powell2

Abstract
Technology-facilitated sexual violence (TFSV) refers to a range of behaviors where digital technologies are used to facilitate both
virtual and face-to-face sexually based harms. Such behaviors include online sexual harassment, gender- and sexuality-based
harassment, cyberstalking, image-based sexual exploitation, and the use of a carriage service to coerce a victim into an unwanted sexual act. This article reviews the current state of knowledge on these different dimensions, drawing on existing empirical
studies. While there is a growing body of research into technology-facilitated harms perpetrated against children and adolescents,
there is a dearth of qualitative and quantitative research on TFSV against adults. Moreover, few of the existing studies provide
reliable data on the nature, scope, and impacts of TFSV. Preliminary studies, however, indicate that some harms, much like sexual
violence more broadly, may be predominantly gender-, sexuality-, and age-based, with young women being overrepresented as
victims in some categories. This review collects the empirical evidence to date regarding the prevalence and gender-based nature
of TFSV against adults and discusses the implications for policy and programs, as well as suggestions for future research.
Keywords
technology, sexual violence, online sexual harassment, Internet communication, online victimization, revenge pornography

Introduction
Sexual violence and harassment are widely recognized as globally significant human rights problems.1 According to estimates by the World Health Organization (WHO, 2013), 35%
of women worldwide report having experienced either physical
or sexual violence by a partner, or sexual violence by a friend,
family member, acquaintance, or stranger. National studies and
police data indicate the highly gendered pattern to sexual violence, with women continuing to represent the majority of
victims and men overwhelmingly, although not exclusively,
the perpetrators. Young women aged 16 to 24 years are widely
recognized as being at greatest risk of experiencing sexual
assault, and most often at the hands of a known man, such as
a boyfriend, friend, or acquaintance, rather than a stranger (for
prevalence studies, see, e.g., Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2013; Bureau of Justice Statistics [US], 2013; Office for
National Statistics [UK], 2014). Further studies indicate that
sexual harassment is likewise a persistent problem. National
surveys in Australia indicate that 1 in 3 women experience
sexual harassment in their lifetime compared to 1 in 10 men
(Australian Human Rights Commission, 2012). The international literature thus demonstrates the persistent nature and
prevalence of sexual violence and harassment and that these
harms2 are disturbingly common, highly gendered, and most
often relational.
With the rapid uptake of Internet-enabled devices, such as
computers, laptops, mobile phones, and tablets, and online

communication services, such as social media networks and
social applications, it is perhaps unsurprising that digital technologies might also be used as tools to facilitate sexually based
harms. While empirical studies have highlighted perpetrators
use of technology to facilitate domestic violence (see Burke,
Wallen, Vail-Smith, & Knox, 2011; Dimond, Fiesler, & Bruckman, 2011), dating abuse (see Stonard, Bowen, Lawrence, &
Price, 2014; Zweig, Dank, Yahner, & Lachman, 2013), cyberstalking (see Sheridan & Grant, 2007; Spitzberg & Hoobler,
2002), and sexual exploitation of children (see Martin & Alaggia, 2013; Mitchell, Jones, Finkelhor, & Wolak, 2011), there is
a dearth of empirical research examining the varied nature and
prevalence of behaviors involving technology. Similar to the
broader, umbrella term of sexual violence that is widely
used in the research literature, we use a broad term to capture
an array of abusive behaviors involving technology; what we
call technology-facilitated sexual violence (hereinafter, TFSV).
This conceptualization refers to a range of criminal, civil, or
otherwise harmful sexually aggressive and harassing behaviors

1
2

La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia
RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

Corresponding Author:
Nicola Henry, Department of Social Inquiry, La Trobe University, Bundoora,
Victoria 3086, Australia.
Email: n.henry@latrobe.edu.au

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

2

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

that are perpetrated with the aid or use of communication
technologies.
To date, empirical studies of TFSV have almost exclusively
focused on children and adolescents, and very little research
has examined adult victimization or perpetration.3 This article
provides a literature review of the few existing empirical studies concerning the nature and/or prevalence of various forms of
TFSV against adults. The findings of this review are organized
according to five different, but interconnected, dimensions,
which include (1) online sexual harassment, (2) gender- and
sexuality-based harassment, (3) cyberstalking, (4) image-based
sexual exploitation, and (5) the use of a carriage service to
perpetrate a sexual assault or coerce an unwanted sexual experience.4 The first section justifies the papers terminology and
inclusion of dimensions. The second section describes the
method for the literature review. The third section then presents
the key findings from existing empirical studies based on this
literature review, and the final section discusses the implications for policy and practice.

TFSV: Parameters and Terminology
There are a number of terms that are used interchangeably to
refer to digital abuse, cyberstalking, and cyberbullying in the
broader research literature. For instance, empirical studies use
terms such as electronic aggression (Bennett et al., 2011),
electronic harassment (Fenaughty & Harre, 2013), and
online harassment (Finn, 2004; Lindsay, Booth, Messing,
& Thaller, in press) to refer to a range of behaviors. A small
number of empirical studies specifically focus on the intersection between online victimization and sexual aggression or
coercion. Thompson and Morrison (2013), for instance, use the
term technology-based coercive behavior in their analysis of
sexually based digital behaviors (e.g., asking someone online
for sexual information about them, posting a sexually suggestive message or picture to someones online profile, etc.).
Gamez-Guadix, Almendros, Borrajo, and Calvete (2015, p.
145) refer to online victimization as pressure to obtain
unwanted sexual cooperation or the dissemination of a victims
sexual content through the Internet. Reyns, Burek, Henson,
and Fisher (2013) use Marcum, Higgins, and Rickettss (2010)
term cybervictimization to refer to receiving sexually explicit images, harassment, and sexual solicitation. These empirical
studies on digital violence, however, tend not to categorize
different behaviors into separate dimensions, and often online
sexual harassment (Barak, 2005) or cyber harassment
(Citron, 2014) serve simply as broad residual categories to
capture a range of different digital acts of sexual aggression
or harassment. This article, however, seeks to distinguish
between different behaviors by referring to five overlapping
dimensions. These dimensions include harassing or violent acts
that involve unwanted sexual attention, speech acts, acts that
cause fear or apprehension, image-based violations, or physical/contact offenses. The justification for this categorization is
that it allows better tailored legal, policy, and prevention
responses to these diverse behaviors. The impacts on victims

vary between these different dimensions, perpetrators of one
behavior are not the same as others, and criminal justice
responses must respond differently to diverse victims and perpetrators in order to be fair, just, and effective.
Other scholars investigating online abuse and harassment
tend not to focus on either sexual or gendered harms or violations, although they may include a couple of items relating to
sexually based behaviors. Indeed, the line between sexual and
nonsexual behaviors is not always clear-cut. One example is
intimate partner cyberstalking where a perpetrator uses technology, such as global positional system [GPS] tracking, as a
means of control and surveillance over his or her victim.
Another example is calling someone a pejorative sexual and
gendered name (e.g., a slut), which may not be a form of
online sexual abuse when used in good faith (e.g., in a comedy
sketch or as a joke among friends). Second, although sexuality
and gender are intricately related, not all forms of digital abuse
are necessarily gendered.5 The widespread mob harassment
of a female blogger, for example, might not necessarily constitute a form of gender-based harassment, unless gender is the
reason or motivation behind the abuse (otherwise known as
bias motivation).
While there are murky distinctions that require further
investigation, existing legislation on stalking, sexual harassment, and hate speech in offline contexts provide useful guidance on the construction of distinctions. The dimensions
discussed in this article are modeled on these existing and not
always unproblematic legal definitions. The criteria is that an
act is done because of the gender or sexual orientation of the
person or some or all people in the group, and/or is perpetrated
with the intent to harm, and/or does result in significant harm to
the victim; harms which might (or might not) be specifically
gendered. This does not necessarily mean the perpetrators
motives have to be specifically or solely on the grounds of
gender or sexuality, but rather the behavior is in part the result
of a social context of gender inequality and hierarchization that
in turn shapes normative expectations surrounding femininity
and masculinity (Connell, 1987). This notion of gender hierarchy enables more nuance and complexity to be captured in
terms of both perpetration and victimization. First, it enables an
acknowledgment that men, boys, and transgender people are
also victims of TFSV, in the same way that females and transgender individuals are also perpetrators of these behaviors.
Second, this conceptualization enables a thorough investigation of the social constructs of masculinity and femininity in
both online and offline spaces, including the gendered impacts
of these behaviors, and the ways in which intersections of
marginalization on the basis of age, race, religion, ethnicity,
sexuality, and sex may play out in highly complex ways.
Keeping these important distinctions in mind, a range of
online behaviors can be confidently excluded from the categorization of TFSV, such as people defacing a Facebook memorial
page of a deceased person or other forms of cyberharassment,
cyberstalking, and hate speech that are not explicitly or implicitly linked to sexual violence, or sexual- and gender-based
harassment. Accordingly, the use of technology as a

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

Henry and Powell

3

surveillance and tracking device in the context of intimate
partner violence is excluded in this review since such behaviors
are not specifically forms of sexual violence or sexual harassment (although may of course be part of a pattern of abuse). On
the other hand, as sexual violence is common in many abusive
relationships, we do include some forms of cyberstalking in
one of our five dimensions discussed below, when it is
unwanted and repeated sexual pursuit that causes fear and
apprehension. Likewise, on the same grounds, we include sexually motivated gender-based hate speech.

Method
Empirical research on TFSV is extremely sparse, and as such,
the present study does not follow the systematic review
approach. Instead the authors present a review of the research
literature pertaining either to a collection of sexually based
behaviors or to studies that individually examine a particular
dimension of TFSV.
The analysis of the existing literature sought to explore the
gendered prevalence, nature, and impacts of TFSV. All peerreviewed journal articles that were included in this review
specifically include one or more of the aforementioned five
dimensions relating to adults over the age of 18 years or were
on digital abuse more generally but related to adults over the
age of 18 years and included at least 1 item relevant to TFSV.
The review was based on an extensive electronic literature
search using a variety of databases (e.g., Academic Search
Premier, CINCH, Google Scholar, PsychINFO). Reference
lists in each of the articles were also reviewed. Theoretical
and/or legal articles were excluded if they were not based on
empirical, quantitative research.6 Only scholarly articles that
were written in English since January 1, 1995, were included in
the review.
Given the broad range of behaviors included in this study, a
variety and combination of key words were used in the review,
including cyberstalking/cyberbullying/online stalking/cyber
harassment, distribution of sexual assault images/revenge
porn/pornography/sexting, electronic/cyber/online sexual harassment/bullying/aggression/coercion, gender and online gaming, gender-based hate speech/vilification, sexploitation,
technology/electronic/communication technology/digital/
online/cyber communication technology and sexual violence/
dating violence/sexual abuse, and virtual rape. The original
literature search produced in excess of 500 articles, in part due
to the broad range of key words used. Of these, a number were
selected (based on the criteria above) from the abstract reading
for further review or from reference lists of those selected
articles. Of these articles reviewed, 11 were included in the
final review because they met all of the inclusion criteria: the
study included at least one item in their survey that fit with the
authors conceptualization of TFSV, the study was on adults
and was quantitative in design, there was sufficient information
regarding the methodology and results of the study, and the
article was published in a peer-reviewed, English-language
journal. A table of existing empirical research on adult forms

Table 1. Quantitative Studies on Technology-Facilitated Sexual Violence (TFSV).
TFSV Dimensions

Studies Identified

(1) Online sexual harassment

Ballard and Welch (in press),
Baumgartner, Valkenburg, and
Peter (2010), Burke, Wallen,
Vail-Smith, and Knox (2011),
Dreing, Bailer, Anders,
Wagner, and Gallas (2014), Finn
(2004), Spitzberg and Hoobler
(2002), and Staude-Muller,
Hansen, and Voss (2012)
Ballard and Welch (in press)

(2) Gender- and sexuality-based
harassment
(3) Cyber-obsessive pursuit
(cyberstalking)

(4) Image-based sexual
exploitation

(5) The use of a carriage service
to perpetrate a sexual assault
or coerce an unwanted sexual
experience

Ballard and Welch (in press),
Burke et al. (2011), Dreing
et al. (2014), Spitzberg and
Hoobler (2002), and Thompson
and Morrison (2013)
Burke et al. (2011), Dreing et al.
(2014), Drouin and Tobin
(2014), Drouin, Ross, and Tobin
(2015), Gamez-Guadix,
Almendros, Borrajo, and
Calvete (2015), and Thompson
and Morrison (2013)
Baumgartner, Valkenburg, and
Peter (2010), Gamez-Guadix
et al. (2015), and Thompson and
Morrison (2013)

of TFSV was constructed according to the different dimensions
(see Table 1).
Although not technically part of the literature review, in the
discussion below, where there is a lack of empirical data specifically on digital sexual violence and harassment, the article
refers to a number of existing empirical studies that explore
more generally online digital abuse and violence. Likewise,
some empirical studies on sexually based harms against children and adolescents are also discussed. Finally, a small number of surveys that have been published in nonacademic
journals (e.g., surveys conducted by organizations) are referred
to in order to supplement what is currently known about TFSV.
The studies that do not fit the criteria listed above form part of
the narrative discussion presented here but are not included in
Table 1.

TFSV: Key Findings
To date, minimal research has been conducted on the manner in
which communication technologies are used to facilitate
diverse forms of sexual violence and harassment, particularly
against adults. The authors, both individually and collectively,
have examined some elements of this including challenges for
law and policy agencies in responding to these behaviors
(Powell, 2010; Henry & Powell, 2014). Their qualitative
research, involving interviews with key stakeholders across

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

4

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

Table 2. Practice, Policy, and Research Implications.
Stakeholders
Practitioners (law
enforcement, service sector
providers)

Policy makers and law reform

Researchers

Recommendations
 Training and resources for
law enforcement to identify
and respond to digital
criminal violence,
harassment, and
cyberstalking
 Collaboration between
police and service sectors for
evidence gathering
 Training and resources to
provide support and advice
to victims (helplines and free
support/advice centers)
 Clear community codes of
conduct; mechanisms for
victims to report harassing
behaviors and have content
removed
 Introduction of specific
criminal and civil legislation
on Technology-Facilitated
Sexual Violence (TFSV)
behaviors
 Public awareness campaigns
on perpetrator and bystander
responsibility
 School curriculum packages
on ethical digital relationships
 Further quantitative/qualitative
research on prevalence,
nature/impacts of TFSV

legal services, police, and support services, suggests that TFSV
is both highly gendered (because more women appear to be
targeted, often by known male perpetrators) and increasingly
common (see Henry & Powell, 2015a). Public submissions to a
number of government and parliamentary reviews in recent
years lend further support to the need for empirical data on
both perpetration and victimization (see, e.g., Australian Law
Reform Commission Inquiry into Serious Invasions of Privacy
in the Digital Era, 2014; Department of Justice Canada, 2002;
Parliament of the United Kingdom Communications Committee, 2014; Victorian Law Reform Inquiry Into Sexting, 2013).
Little is currently known about the nature, scope, prevalence,
impacts, and experiences among victims of these different but
interconnected behaviors. Little is also known about the gender
of perpetrators and victims and the intersections of other forms
of discrimination and disadvantage on the grounds of race, age,
socioeconomic status, and sexuality. Indeed, nearly all of the
studies to date on digital victimization concern children and
adolescents. Below the literature on each of the five dimensions
is explored.
Online sexual harassment. Empirical studies demonstrate that
online sexual harassment is a growing problem, especially

among young adults in college or university settings (Lindsay
& Krysik, 2012). Online sexual harassment, however, potentially captures a wide range of harassing behaviors, including
cyberbullying, cyberstalking, gender-based hate speech,
image-based sexual exploitation (i.e., revenge pornography), and rape threats (these terms are discussed in the relevant sections below). The broader research literature on
cyberstalking and online harassment does not always specify
whether the harassment is sexual in nature. Different definitions are also employed making comparisons between studies
and estimates of prevalence extremely difficult (see, e.g., Blumenfeld & Cooper, 2010; Finn, 2004; Hinduja & Patchin,
2008; Lindsay & Krysik, 2012).
Researchers often take a broader view of online harassment,
inclusive of hate speech and sometimes cyberstalking. Barak
(2005, p. 78), for example, lists three main forms of online
sexual harassment, which include gender harassment (harassment on the basis of ones gender, including hate speech),
unwanted sexual attention (sexually based comments and
remarks), and sexual coercion (being coerced into an inperson or virtual sex act). As mentioned above, conceptual
clarity and distinctions between these different behaviors can
be usefully made with guidance from conventional (often legal)
definitions. For example, sexual harassment is defined as
unwanted or unwelcome sexual behavior, which makes a person feel offended, humiliated or intimidated (Australian
Human Rights Commission, 2012). Offline stalking, on the
other hand, may refer legally to repeated behaviors that cause
the victim to feel apprehension or fear. Hate speech (or vilification) is also treated separately under laws in many jurisdictions, where hate speech is defined as offensive and harmful
speech.
Although there are inevitable overlaps between different
dimensions, this article draws on the narrower definition of
sexual harassment as provided in legal statutes as unwanted
sexual attention online, defined by Barak (2005, p. 78) as
uninvited behaviors that explicitly communicate sexual
desires or intentions towards another individual. This may
include either virtual or face-to-face contact in public forums
or chat rooms or through private communications via mobile
phone, e-mail, or Internet sites using either verbal comments or
graphic images.7
To date, most empirical studies on online sexual harassment
have focused on children and adolescents (see Bossler, Holt, &
May, 2012; Ybarra, Espelage, & Mitchell, 2007). Some data
exist, however, on the prevalence of online sexual harassment
against adults. Finn (2004), for instance, examined online harassment more generally but included only 1 item on sexual
harassment. Although his sexual harassment item only focused
on the receipt of unwanted pornographic images, his study of
college students at the University of New Hampshire (n  339)
found that more than half (58.7%) had received such images. In
another study (again not specifically on sexual harassment),
Goodson, McCormick, and Evans (2001) conducted a survey
on Internet users behaviors and attitudes when searching for
sexually explicit material online, finding that 15.8% of their

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

Henry and Powell

5

sample of undergraduate students (n  506) said that they had
felt sexually harassed during chat room interactions, with more
women reporting sexual harassment in chat rooms than men.
In another study, again more generally examining online
victimization, and including only 1 sexual harassment item,
Staude-Muller, Hansen, and Voss (2012) found that 68.3% of
their German sample (n  9,000) aged between 10 and 50
reported having experienced online sexual harassment, which
the authors defined as included receiving pornographic material or being asked intimate questions. According to this study,
females were far more likely to be exposed to online sexual
harassment, although it is not clear what being asked intimate
questions entails or how pornographic material was distributed or received.
In comparison to these broader studies of cyber harassment,
Baumgartner, Valkenburg, and Peter (2010, p. 439) focused
specifically on online sexual solicitation, which they define
as receiving unwanted requests to talk about sex or do
something sexual. They found in their sample of Dutch adults
(n  1,026) that only 4.6% of men and 6.7% of women had
been sexually solicited online in the past 6 months. This was
compared to 5.6% of male adolescents and 19.1% of female
adolescents who had been sexually solicited online in the past
6 months. Although the authors did not separate receiving
unwanted requests to talk about sex from doing something
sexual, which are two different acts with potentially different
impacts, the study does demonstrate a high rate of victimization
among female adolescents. Their relatively overall low prevalence rate is similar to the results of a Pew Research Center
(2014, p. 3) survey of adult Internet users, finding that 6% of
respondents said they had personally experienced sexual harassment. The Pew Center survey, however, found that women
were more likely than men to experience online sexual harassment (25% compared to 13%) and that young women aged
between 18 and 24 experience online sexual harassment at
disproportionately high levels.
Finally, in Ballard and Welchs (in press) online survey of
self-selected multiplayer online games (MMOGs; n  151),
52% of participants frequently reported being cyber victimized
and 23% being sexually harassed. While males and females
reported similar rates of cyber victimization, male participants,
according to this study reported higher rates of cyberbullying,
and females reported significantly higher rates of sexual harassment than males during MMOG play. The study used a
convenience sample of online, self-selected participants, and
as such the findings are not generalizable but nonetheless provide an indication of the scope of the problem.
It is important to note that surveys that do not provide a
definition of online sexual harassment to their respondents
might yield overall conservative prevalence figures given that
victims do not always label their experiences sexual harassment. For example, the Pew Center study simply asked
respondents whether they had experienced sexual harassment
and did not provide a definition. This is indicated in studies on
offline forms of sexual harassment where, according to one
study, one in five (18%) people indicated they had not been

sexually harassed but then went on to report having experienced behaviors that constituted sexual harassment according
to the legal definition (Australian Human Rights Commission,
2012). Those surveys that specifically ask respondents about
sexual harassment with a definition or examples provided, do
not necessarily capture the range of sexually harassing behaviors seen with the rapid development of smart phone technology or social media use in more recent years.
Although it is not possible to report on prevalence of online
sexual harassment based on these few existing studies on adult
Internet users, these studies are relatively consistent in their
findings that sexual harassment disproportionately affects
women both in extent and impacts, particularly young women.
For instance, in a study of undergraduate U.S. college students
(n  342), Lindsay, Booth, Messing, and Thaller (in press, p. 9)
found that there were gender differences in terms of frequency
of harassment, being harassed by a known person, and psychological impacts:
Females reported more frequent incidences of harassment than
males, with 34% reporting being harassed at least once by someone they knew, 17% having been harassed by someone that they
did not know, 21% reporting being harassed by a significant
other, and 31% reporting being harassed after they had asked the
person to stop. Females also reported feeling fear as a result more
often than males.

This is also consistent with empirical data on sexual harassment in the workplace. For example, the Australian Human
Rights Commission (2012) telephone survey found that 1 in
5 women, compared to 1 in 20 men, reported experiencing
sexual harassment in the workplace. The data are also relatively
consistent with research on online sexual harassment against
children and youth. For example, Bossler, Holt, and May
(2012) found that 44% of female adolescents respondents had
experienced online sexual harassment in the past 12 months
compared to 26% of adolescent males. More research, however, is needed to understand prevalence, victimization, and
perpetration of online sexual harassment against adults, particularly given the advances in technologies over the past 5 years.8
Gender- and sexuality-based harassment. According to Barak
(2005, p. 78), gender harassment involves unwelcome verbal
and visual comments and remarks that insult individuals
because of their gender . . . [such as] posting pornographic
pictures in public or in places where they deliberately insult,
telling chauvinistic jokes, and making gender-related degrading remarks. Gender harassment can take place via chat
rooms, forums, and through e-mail and social media sites. This
article defines gender harassment more broadly to also include
sexuality-based harassment which refers to harassment on the
grounds of a persons sexuality or sexual orientation. Thus,
gender and sexuality harassment refers to a course of conduct
that causes harm and distress including (but not limited to)
gender and sexuality-based hate speech,9 rape threats, reputation harming lies, impersonation, false accusations of sexual

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

6

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

violence, and virtual rape.10 Such behaviors may be perpetrated
by individuals or mobs of individuals (Citron, 2014). Cyberstalking, on the other hand, refers to a course of conduct,
involving any of the behaviors mentioned above (e.g., rape
threats), perpetrated by a lone individual or a mob, that cause
the victim to feel fear and apprehension, similar to the definition found in offline stalking definitions. Citron (2014, p. 3)
acknowledges the distinction between the two, namely that
cyber harassment causes emotional distress, whereas cyberstalking causes fear for ones safety or of bodily harm (discussed further below). Nonetheless, she discusses them
interchangeably because, she notes, they are accomplished
by similar means and achieve similar ends. Although Citrons
rationale makes sense, in this article gender- and sexualitybased harassment are treated as a separate dimension to cyberstalking, in line with other scholars who treat them as distinct in
both online and offline contexts (e.g., Spitzberg & Cupach,
2014, p. 21).
Although there is some existing research on hostility toward
online gamers more generally (see, e.g., Coyne, Chesney,
Logan, & Madden, 2009; Gray, 2012), there is little empirical
research, both qualitative and quantitative, on gender- and
sexuality-based harassment in online environments. However,
existing research does indicate that women may be subjected to
more abuse online than men in chat rooms and online gaming
environments (see, e.g., Ballard & Welch, in press). For example, researchers at the University of Marylands Electrical
Engineering and Computer Department carried out an experiment using fake male and female user names in the chat
medium Internet Relay Chat (Meyer & Cukier, 2006). They
found that users with female names received on average 100
sexually explicit or threatening messages per day, compared to
users with male names who received on average 3.7 such messages. In a field experiment by Kuznekoff and Rose (2013),
they likewise found in an observational study of networked
violent video games with anonymous players, pre-recorded
female voices received 3 times more negative comments than
the male voice or no voice. In Fox and Tangs (2014) online
survey (n  301), they found that participants who reported
social dominance orientation and conformity to certain types of
masculine norms had higher scores on the Video Game Sexism
Scale. However, the results are not representative due to the
small numbers. In Ballard and Welchs (in press) online survey
of self-selected MMOGs (n  151), 48% of participants
reported being called names with a sexual meaning. They
found that males and heterosexuals perpetrated more cyberbullying against other gamers than do females or lesbian, gay,
bisexual, or transgender people, and females experienced more
victimization than males.
In addition, a few studies have examined misogynistic language in social media sites. For example, Bartlett, Norrie,
Patel, Rumpel, and Wibberley (2014) collected Englishlanguage tweets from Twitter which in the first study included
the word rape and the second study, misogynist language
such as slut and whore. In the first study, they found that
an estimated 12% of tweets using the word rape were

threatening. In the second study, they found that approximately
18% of tweets using the words slut or whore were misogynistic.
Despite media and anecdotal reports regarding forms of simulated sexual violence (virtual rape), as well as graphic and
aggressive written descriptions of rape (rape threats) being
directed largely at women in online environments, the authors
could identify no prevalence studies of these specific forms of
gender-based harassment.
Cyberstalking. Cyberstalking is commonly defined as an extension of offline forms of stalking using electronic means (see
Reyns, Henson, & Fisher, 2012; Tokunaga & Aune, in press;
see also Citron, 2014, p. 155). Like conventional stalking, cyberstalking typically involves behaviors that are unwanted, repetitive, intrusive, threatening, and harassing (Dreing, Bailer,
Anders, Wagner, & Gallas, 2014, p. 61). A number of empirical
studies have investigated rates of cyberstalking, predominantly
in the United States and among college student populations.
Although the reports of online victimization vary widely, a study
by Reyns, Henson, and Fisher (2012) reported that up to 41% of
college students have being a victim of cyberstalking in the past.
Some studies indicate that women were more likely than men to
perpetrate cyberstalking (Alexy, Burgess, Baker, & Smoyak,
2005) and that men report more online victimization than
females (Bennett, Guran, Ramos, & Margolin, 2011), while
other studies found little differences between gender prevalence
and impacts. For example, in one study, Reyns et al. (2012)
found little gender differences; finding that 46.3% of females
in their sample of college students (n  974) reported cyberstalking victimization compared to 32.1% of males.
Yet, the empirical literature on cyberstalking is still emerging in comparison to the well-established field of research into
the nature, extent, and impacts of stalking behaviors more generally. There is a dearth of literature, for example, focusing
more specifically on online intimate partner stalking or monitoring (Darvell, Walsh, & White, 2011; Woodlock, in press) or
online adult dating abuse (Borrajo, Gamez-Guadix, & Calvete,
2015). This is despite some studies identifying that the perpetration of online stalking overlaps considerably with
conventional stalking and most often in intimate partner/expartner contexts (see, e.g., Cavezza & McEwan, 2014; Sheridan & Grant, 2007). A study by Burke, Wallen, Vail-Smith,
and Knox (2011), for example, surveyed 804 undergraduate
students regarding their experiences of technology-based partner monitoring and/or controlling behaviors (such as checking
e-mail/call histories, making excessive texts/calls/e-mails, and
using GPS or other devices to monitor a partner). They found
that partner monitoring behaviors were common (up to 65% of
females and up to 50% of males experiencing excessive phone
calls) and that women were more likely than men to regard these
as appropriate relational behaviors (Burke et al., 2011). This
finding signals a potential shift in perceptions of stalking, also
noted by Spitzberg and Cupach (2007), by which some intrusive
and controlling online behaviors (e.g., excessive contact) are
relatively indistinguishable from acceptable relational or dating
practices or indeed only become harassing or cause fear when

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

Henry and Powell

7

accompanied by other abusive behaviors or when a relationship
ends.
There is a lack of clarity over what constitutes cyberstalking as opposed to online sexual harassment or even cyberbullying (Dreing et al., 2014; Shorey, Cornelius, & Strauss,
2015), as many empirical studies do not apply definitions
requiring that the behaviors are repeated and cause the target
to feel threatened or fearful for their safety (as discussed
above). Some studies include instances of social media stalking such as monitoring a persons publicly available Facebook posts (Chaulk & Jones, 2011; Lyndon, Bonds-Raacke,
& Cratty, 2011), impersonating a persons online identity
(Spitzberg & Hoobler, 2002), or posting a persons photograph
to a pornographic site (Finn, 2004), regardless of whether that
behavior was part of a repeated pattern and/or caused fear.
Nonetheless some scholars advocate that the term cyberstalking be reserved for its legal definition requiring repeated behaviors that cause fear and that alternative terms be used to name
less severe methods of online pursuit that may or may not
escalate to cyberstalking (DreBing et al., 2014, p. 65; see also
Finn, 2004). For instance, Spitzberg and Hoobler (2002, p. 73)
use the term obsessive relational intrusion (ORI) to refer to
the unwanted pursuit of intimacy through the repeated invasion of a persons sense of physical or symbolic privacy. They
define cyber-obsessional pursuit (COP) describing such
behaviors when conducted via digital or online means. Importantly, they note that while stalking/cyberstalking is often a
form of ORI/COP, the concepts are distinct since stalking
might instead be motivated by relational terrorism, control,
or destruction. Furthermore, not all repeated relational intrusions cause a victim to feel fear, and sometimes these intrusions
may be experienced as simply annoying or pestering (Spitzberg
& Hoobler, 2002; see also Thompson & Morrison, 2013). In a
survey of 235 U.S. college students, Spitzberg and Hoobler
found that almost a third (31%) had experienced at least one
form of COP.
Online obsessive relational pursuit aligns most usefully with
the conceptualization of TFSV presented here. Rather than
seeking to encompass a broad and indeed inconsistent definition of cyberstalking, we find it useful to focus on those cyberstalking behaviors that are characterized by sexual and/or
relational pursuit. Such behaviors are not necessarily captured
by other TFSV dimensions of sexual harassment, or gender/
sexuality-based harassment, and in some cases may further
meet the course of conduct and fear thresholds of criminal
stalking.
Image-based sexual exploitation. There are two behaviors that
come under this fourth dimension. The first is sexting coercion, which Drouin and Tobin (2014, p. 412) define as engaging in unwanted sexual behavior via sexually explicit text,
pictures, or video. The second is the creation, distribution,
or threat of distribution, of intimate or sexually explicit images
of another person without their consent (also known as revenge
pornography). Both have been the subject of very limited
empirical research in the scholarly literature to date.

Nearly all of the existing empirical research concerns more
broadly sexting practices among young people.11 These various sexting studies yield different findings on prevalence,
depending on the participant sample, sampling techniques,
instruments, as well as the different definitions of sexting used
in each study. As such, exact prevalence rates of sexting among
young people are difficult to establish (Klettke, Hallford, &
Mellor, 2014; Lounsbury, Mitchell, & Finkelhor, 2011).
Despite this, studies tend to agree that sexting (receiving and/
or sending sexually explicit text or images) is relatively common among young people (see, e.g., Crofts, Lee, McGovern, &
Milivojevic, 2015; Mitchell, Finkelhor, Jones, & Wolak, 2012;
Patrick, Heywood, Pitts, & Mitchell, in press). For example, in
the first Australian study of sexting among high school students
(based on the broader Fifth National Survey of Australian Secondary Students and Sexual Health survey [n 2,114]),
Patrick, Heywood, Pitts, and Mitchell (in press) found that
sexting overall was common but that prevalence rates varied
depending on the type of activity. In particular, they found that
1 in 10 students had sent a sexually explicit nude or nearly
nude photo or video of someone else. In another recent Australian sexting survey (n  1,200), Crofts, Lee, McGovern, and
Milivojevic (2015) likewise found that sexting was common
among young people but that only 6% of respondents had sent
an image to another person without consent. However, they
found that 20% had shown a sext to another person without
consent but had not actually sent the image to anyone else.
Fewer studies have explored sexting behaviors among the
adult population. Gamez-Guadix et al. (2015) found that
approximately 66% of their sample of self-selected Spanish
adults (aged 1860; n  873) reported having exchanged sexual content online at least once in the past. They found no
differences between men and women in this practice but did
find that sexting was more common among young people and
nonheterosexuals. Gordon-Messer, Bauermeister, Grodzinski,
and Zimmerman (2012) also found a high number (43%) of
18- to 24-year-olds (n  3,447) have engaged in some type of
sexting (receiving and/or sending), as did Reyns et al. (2013)
who found in their study of college students (n  974) that
over 38% said they had either sent or received a sext message.
These figures are in line with a U.S. study by Drouin, Ross,
and Tobin (2015) who conducted a survey based on a convenience sample undergraduate students (n  480). They found
that one in five had been coerced into sending or sharing an
intimate image. They found that while more women than men
engaged in unwanted sexting, sexting coercion victimization was common among both men and women, and that
these individuals were more likely to experience traditional
forms of intimate partner violence (see also Drouin & Tobin,
2014). Englander (2015) conducted a similar study on sexting using a convenience sample of 18- and 19-year-old
university students (n  421). She found that 70% had experienced some degree of pressure or coercion in sexting, and
that all respondents who felt always pressured or coerced
were female. This led her to conclude that males are
much more likely to feel that they want to sext,

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

8

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

while females are more likely to feel pressured and coerced
(Englander, 2015, p. 19).12
Among these various sexting studies, the focus has been
predominantly on college students and on the taking and sharing of the image, rather than the nonconsensual distribution of
the image among adults, also known as revenge pornography.13
In other words, although this body of research has demonstrated the prevalence of sexting and has also explored gender
differences in terms of nature, scope, experiences, and impacts,
little research has investigated the prevalence, scope, nature,
experiences, and impacts of the second behavior falling under
this fourth dimension that of image-based sexual exploitation.
A small number of surveys have been conducted by scholars
or organizations either on technology in intimate relationships
or online victimization more generally. In relation to the latter, in Gamez-Guadix et al.s (2015, p. 146) survey (discussed
above), they defined online sexual victimization (OSV) as:
some type of pressure through the Internet or mobile phones to
obtain unwanted cooperation or sexual contact (e.g., share sexual
information, send images with sexual content, or do something
against the victims wishes) and/or the distribution of dissemination by the perpetrator of sexual images or information of the
victim against his/her will.

They found that OSV was more common among women,
young, and middle-aged adults (e.g., 2535 years) as well as
nonheterosexuals. Furthermore, reporting of victimization
increased significantly among this group according to the
study, although they found that the dissemination of sexual
images without consent was relatively low among respondents
(3.7%). By way of contrast, a broader study on technologybased coercion found a slightly higher percentage (16%) had
shared a sexually suggestive message or picture of someone
without their consent (Thompson & Morrison, 2013).
In relation to broader surveys on technology and intimate
relationships, the McAfee (2013) Love, Relationships, and
Technology Survey of U.S. adults between the age of 18 and
54 (n  1,182) found that 1 in 10 ex-partners had threatened to
expose intimate images of their ex-partners online, with 60%
having carried out the threat. This survey also found that men
(12%) were more likely than women (8%) to have their photos
distributed online, and such threats are more likely to be carried
out against men (63%) than women (50%). In the second McAfee (2014) survey, 54% of respondents said they had sent or
received intimate video, photos, e-mails, or text messages.
Similarly, the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and
Unplanned Pregnancy and Cosmogirl.com study (2008) in their
study of young adults aged between 20 and 26 years (n  627)
found that 24% of women and 40% of men have had a nude or
semi-nude image shared with them intended for someone else.
Although both studies suggest men are more likely to have their
nude images shared or distributed without their consent, the
context in which such images are being shared, by whom, what,
and where, has not been investigated. Overall, these findings on
image-based sexual exploitation are relatively consistent with

the sexting among young people surveys described above
(Crofts et al., 2015 [6%]; Patrick et al., in press [10%]).
In relation to specific revenge porn studies, the only survey
to date is the Cyber Civil Rights Initiatives (2014) Effects of
Revenge Porn Survey. The survey was hosted on the End
Revenge Porn website and respondents self-selected into the
study. The survey had a total of 864 respondents, 90% of whom
were women. The survey found that 80% of respondents had
taken the image themselves and 93% said they experienced
significant emotional distress due to their images being distributed without their consent. The results of the survey indicate
that victims in this sample predominantly identified as female
and that the impacts of these behaviors are gendered because of
the sexual double standards that exist surrounding female sexuality. As respondents self-selected into the survey the results
are not representative. The survey gives little indication of
prevalence, and does not provide sufficient indications of gender differences in either victimization or perpetration.14
To date, there has been limited empirical research particularly on the phenomenon of revenge pornography. Although
some broader studies included items relating to the distribution
or sharing of intimate or sexually explicit images of another
person without their consent, these results are limited because
they did not investigate the impact or severity of these acts. In
other words, existing studies have not explored the context
surrounding the nonconsensual distribution of intimate images.
Moreover, scholarly studies that included items relating either
to sexting coercion or to revenge pornography rely on convenience samples of undergraduate students and are not representative of the general population. More research is thus needed
to understand the prevalence, nature, and impacts of imagebased sexual exploitation.
Technology-facilitated unwanted sexual experiences. Unwanted sexual experiences facilitated through digital technologies can be
classified according to three behaviors. The first is sexual coercion
or sextortion, a form of coercion where a person procures sexual cooperation by putting some kind of pressure on a victim
(Barak, 2005, p. 80). This may be in the form of blackmail, bribery,
or threats such as demanding that the victim engage in either
online or in-person sex acts or demanding the release of intimate
images or information. The second form of unwanted experience
is the use of digital technologies to perpetrate a contact sexual
offense, for example, the use of a dating site or dating app to
organize meeting up with a victim in person before then sexually
assaulting them. The third concerns the use of technologies to
solicit and arrange a third party to sexually assault a person,
whether through deception, false identity, or other means.
Empirical studies thus far on online predatory sexual behaviors have been almost exclusively focused on children and
adolescents, owing to community concerns about childrens
vulnerability and safety, and perhaps due to the erroneous
assumption that only young people are victims of online predatory behavior (see, e.g., Beech, Elliott, Birgden, & Findlater,
2008; Craven, Brown, & Gilchrist, 2006). Only three studies
could be identified that examined the prevalence of unwanted

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

Henry and Powell

9

online sexual experiences among adults. Baumgartner, Valkenburg, and Peter (2010), in a survey of 1,026 Dutch adults
(aged 1888), found that 4.6% of males and 6.7% of females
had been asked to do something sexual when they did not want
to. A further study by Thompson and Morrison (2013) found
that 21.9% of male college students surveyed had engaged in at
least one of five distinct technology-based sexually coercive
behaviors. A substantially smaller proportion reported trying to
persuade someone to talk about sex online when they did not
want to (4.6%) and asking someone to do something sexual
online when they did not want to (2.8%). Finally, GamezGuadix and colleagues (2015) found that 38% of 873 Spanish
adults surveyed had experienced at least 1 of 10 online sexual
victimization behaviors (see Table 1 for items surveyed). These
studies did not, however, examine the role of technology in
successfully facilitating coerced online sex (such as via webcam) or contact sexual offenses. Yet, the use of dating websites
or apps and similar forums to facilitate sexual assault is an issue
reportedly being encountered by both police (Powell & Henry,
in press) and sexual assault services (Henry & Powell, 2014).
While there are a plethora of studies about offenders online
grooming of children and young people for sexual abuse, this
review identified no studies that sought to gauge the prevalence
of related sexual predatory behaviors in the experiences of
adult victims.

Discussion and Avenues for Future Research
This literature review sought to examine the empirical, quantitative literature on a range of TFSV behaviors experienced by
adults. Research regarding TFSV among adults is still extremely
new, and there are significant limitations in both the scope and
number of empirical studies conducted to date. First, the instruments used in these studies vary widely, meaning that their findings are not comparable. The lack of standardized, uniform
definitions was particularly problematic with a wide variety of
behaviors being associated with particular categories, particularly
online sexual harassment. Many of the studies were more broadly
focusing on either technology and intimate relationships or technology and cyber victimization. As such, most studies only
included a small number of items relating to the TFSV behaviors
identified in this article. However, these studies did not examine
the context underlying these acts. For instance, studies that
included items on the nonconsensual distribution of intimate
images did not examine the impacts of such behaviors.
Second, the quality of findings in the studies included in this
review also varied. Some studies did not detail their methodologies rigorously. The generalizability of findings to entire communities or populations was not often discussed, with most
studies not examining their participants characteristics against
target populations. Some studies made claims that there were
gender differences in behaviors experienced, without giving
frequency data regarding how often the behaviors were experienced. Many of the studies too overrepresented either male or
female students in their samples.

Third, the mean age of all studies samples was quite young.
Most studies used an undergraduate college (university) student sample. This has significant implications for understanding TFSV, and there is as such limited knowledge of how
middle to older aged groups experience such behaviors. Similarly, little is known of prevalence rates of TFSV in different
racial, ethnic, or sexuality groups. Finns (2004) study examined prevalence in different sexuality groups, finding that
approximately one third who identified as gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (GLBT) reported getting a harassing email from someone they did not know, or barely knew, compared to only 14.6% of heterosexual students. This is not a
significant finding, given only 16 students identified as GLBT,
yet it is important that further investigation be undertaken in
relation to TFSV against sexual minorities.
Anecdotal accounts, qualitative research, legal analysis,
government inquiries, and media reports suggest that the range
of sexually based harms that are identified in this article warrant
further investigation. Indeed, part of the impetus for this review
is the significant community and government concern regarding
what appear to be rapidly increasing instances of sexual violence and harassment both online and via mobile phone or other
communications devices. Following several high-profile cases
in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, and elsewhere, it has become evident that in many
jurisdictions there are gaps in legislative responses to newly
emerging harms, particularly where the use and distribution
of sexual or intimate images is part of a pattern of online abuse
or harassment. The authors own qualitative research with key
legal professionals and womens counsellor-advocates has
identified cause for concern over the uses of online harassment
and blackmail (dubbed sexploitation by some stakeholders),
whereby sexual images in particular have been used to coerce or
harass women in domestic and sexual violence situations
(Henry & Powell, 2015a; see also Bluett-Boyd, Fileborn, Quadara, & Moore, 2013). Thus more than general bullying or
harassment behaviors, what is emerging is the troubling extension of gender-based violence in online spaces.
This phenomenon is troubling, not because these behaviors
necessarily constitute new harms, but rather because the
reach, nature, and duration of these harms, as well as the current gaps in legal redress available to victims, makes them both
insidious and difficult to respond to. Yet, it is clear that the
community is raising concerns about these behaviors, and governments are framing legislative responses, even in the absence
of empirical research. Further quantitative research into the
prevalence and gender-based nature of TFSV would therefore
usefully inform the development of legislative and regulatory
responses, as well as community education focused on awareness raising and prevention.
Future research needs to focus on identifying the extent and
nature of a range of TFSV behaviors, including prevalence and
impacts of victimization and perpetration, the gender dynamics
of these behaviors, individual actions taken to respond, and the
outcomes of those actions. A nuanced approach to examining
TFSV is most appropriate, and a mixed methods approach is

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

10

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

important to capture an array of behaviors, including those
within intimate partner relationships, those that use various
specific technologies (such as dating apps and sites), behaviors
specific to certain environments (e.g., workplaces), and behaviors documented within the popular media. Future research
also needs to investigate the relationship between violence and
attitudes to violence, gender, and sexuality, and focus on the
intersections between gender, sexuality, race, age, and other
factors. Overall, prevalence data regarding adult experiences
of TFSV are crucial to further informing both reforms to law
and practice, and future research.

Conclusion
To date, the vast majority of empirical studies on different
dimensions of online abuse and harassment focus on children
and adolescents. In contrast, there are very few quantitative
studies on adults and virtually no qualitative studies on the
phenomenon of TFSV. Of the studies discussed here, few studies provide reliable data on prevalence, perpetration, and victimization. Most of the studies to date use convenience samples
of college students. Overall, there is a clear lack of research
into diverse forms of TFSV against adults, with the exception
of some forms of online sexual harassment and cyberstalking.
However, what these existing studies do indicate is that TFSV
against adults is a growing problem with serious and wideranging impacts. Furthermore, although prevalence rates are
difficult to establish due to different participant samples, sampling techniques, instruments, and definitions used, this body
of research demonstrates that both women and men may be
victims and perpetrators of online sexual violence and harassment; however, women, as well as lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans,
intersex persons are more likely to be targeted for specific
forms of digital abuse. This is perhaps not unsurprising, given
what is already known about conventional forms of sexual
harassment, sexual violence, and discrimination. Online forms
of sexual violence and harassment likewise stem from the
socially constructed beliefs and attitudes about gender and
sexuality (including victim blaming and victim shame and
stigma) as well as perpetrator motivations for power and control. Digital technologies then serve as a tool to perpetrate more
conventional forms of gender- and sexuality-based violence
and harassment, with different effects and impacts due to anonymity, the failure of regulation, as well as the sheer speed and
vast reach of the Internet. Further empirical research is needed
in order to shed light on the nature, scope, prevalence, and
impacts of such behaviors.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Dr. Rachel King for her excellent
research assistance on this paper.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This
research was funded by an Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Projects grant: DP130103094.

Notes
1. Sexual violence is an all-encompassing term that includes any
sexual act, attempt to obtain a sexual act, unwanted sexual comments or advances, or acts to traffic, or otherwise directed, against
a persons sexuality using coercion, by any person regardless of
their relationship to the victim, in any setting, including but not
limited to home and work (World Health Organization [WHO],
2011). This definition captures physical acts, such as rape (generally considered to be a penetrative offense) or sexual assault (a
physical attack not necessarily involving penetration) as well as
noncontact offenses or behaviors, such as sexual harassment and
sexual coercion. The term sexual violence and its widespread
usage among academics and professionals indicates that violence
is not simply a physical act involving physical injury. For
instance, a rape can result in no direct physical injury to a victims
body but can have long-lasting psychological and physical
impacts. Likewise, domestic violence is usually defined to
incorporate finanical, emotional, and physical abuse. Throughout
the article, the authors use the term sexual violence to encompass
a diverse range of acts involving technology, drawing on the
WHO definition. The authors discuss a diversity of acts increasingly identified in the research literature and provide analysis of
the benefits and limitations of these definitions in the relevant
sections.
2. Please note that the authors intentionally use the term harms
throughout the article because such a term captures acts that may
not be deemed a criminal offense or a civil wrong under law.
While this is a broad and unspecified term, it has the benefit of
capturing impacts on victims where some kind of physical, psychological, social, or financial harm has resulted.
3. The authors define an adult as a person over the age of 18
years, although they recognize that in some cultures, a child may
be classified or defined according to a different chronological age,
life experience, or emotional maturity.
4. The dimensions outlined in this article represent a refinement
from the authors previous work, where the dimensions were
organized differently (see Henry & Powell, 2014, 2015a,
2015b). The dimensions are overlapping; for instance, the nonconsensual distribution of intimate images could be both a form of
cyberstalking and online sexual harassment. The difficulty in constructing categories in large part stems from the complex entanglement between conventional and online behaviors, as well as
the different terminology used in a range of studies examining
digital abuse more generally.
5. Gender-based violence has been defined to mean violence that is
directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects
women disproportionately (Art 3 d Council of Europe Convention). However, this definition problematically collapses gender with women. In this article, the terms sexual violence

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

Henry and Powell

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11

and harassment are preferred, although recognizing that genderbased violence can be usefully thought of in relation to prevalence
(e.g., women, men, or trans women/men being disproportionately
targeted for specific forms of harassment and violence), nature (e.
g., the victims sexed body is a source of objectification, currency, ridicule, and insult), and impacts (e.g., victims experience
more adverse impacts because of their gender). Gender, however,
is not always the most important variable and an intersectional
approach is preferable to understanding violence both offline and
online. For instance, the sexual abuse of Iraqi prisoners at Abu
Ghraib prison, or the targeting of men and young boys for the
1995 Srebrenica massacre during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, are both examples of gender-based and racial/ethnic-based
violence.
A small number of scholars have examined online digital
abuse in relation to sexual violence and harassment from a
conceptual/theoretical and/or legal framework of analysis
(see, e.g., Henry & Powell, 2015b). Currently, there are very
few empirical studies though on TFSV using qualitative methodologies, such as interviews with victim and stakeholders,
focus group discussion, content analysis, or case law analysis
(see Bluett-Boyd et al., 2013; Draucker & Marstolf, 2010;
Henry & Powell, 2015a).
Note that unwanted sex-related e-mails (e.g., advertisements for
Viagra) are not discussed in this article because any harms associated with such e-mails are not on a par with other harms discussed in this article.
In terms of online sexual harassment perpetration, Cooper,
Delmonico, Griffin-Shelley, and Mathy (2004, p. 131) in
their study on online sexual activity (the use of the internet
for any activity (text, audio, graphics) that involves sexuality), found that approximately 14% of participants (n 
7,000) reported that someone had complained to them about
their online sexual behavior. This study was not specifically
on sexual harassment but rather focused on online sexual
compulsivity, which the authors define as attempts to find
sexual partners on the Internet as well as cybersex. It is not
included in the final table (Table 1) because it is not clear
whether respondents were referring to behaviors amounting to
sexual harassment.
Gender or sexuality-based hate speech (or vilification) can be
defined as offensive speech or conduct which can incite hatred
or contempt on the basis of either sexuality or gender, and is done
(out of ill will) because of the gender or sexuality of a person or all
people of that group and is likely to offend, insult, humiliate, or
intimidate an individual or a group of people. While in some legal
jurisdictions, sexuality-based hate speech may be prohibited by
law because it incites violence or discrimination against the
group, in most common law jurisdictions, gender-based hate
speech is not unlawful or criminal under law, unless it constitutes
a form of criminal harassment or stalking (see Weston-Scheuber,
2012).
Virtual rape is used to describe a situation when a persons
avatar (or digital representation of themselves) is subjected to
simulated sexual violence by other avatars, most recently in
three-dimensional virtual worlds.

11. The term sexting includes the sending of intimate or sexually
explicit text, still images and videos from mobile to mobile or
from mobile to Internet sites. Nonconsensual sexting is used
interchangeably with the term revenge pornography.
12. Reyns et al. (2013, p. 14) likewise explored the relationship
between sexting and cyber victimization, although in their words
did not disentangle the effects of sending and receiving sext
messages separately.
13. In addition to these various quantitative studies on adult forms
of sexting, there is complementary qualitative research that has
explored the perceptions and experiences of sexting among
young people (see Albury, Crawford, Byron, & Mathews,
2013; Burkett, 2015; Crofts et al., 2015; Ringrose, Gill,
Livingstone, & Harvey, 2012; Walker, Sanci, & Temple
Smith, 2013).
14. Although not reliable indications of prevalence or gender differences in victimization and perpetration, figures obtained by police
and/or revenge porn helplines internationally provide an indicative picture. Since the establishment of the UK Revenge Porn
Helpline, the August 2015 figures revealed that females constituted 75% of all people seeking advice and support. Furthermore,
of the 25% of calls to the helpline from men, 40% identified as
being homosexual (Gov.uk, 2015). In Japan, police records
indicated that 110 cases of revenge porn were reported in December 2014 alone following the introduction of the new laws, with
the majority of victims being female in their late 20s or older
(Wright, 2015).

References
Albury, K., Crawford, K., Byron, P., & Mathews, B. (2013). Young
people and sexting in Australia: Ethics, representation and the law
Australia. Australia: ARC Centre for Creative Industries and Innovation/Journalism and Media Research Centre University of New
South Wales.
Alexy, E. M., Burgess, A. W., Baker, T., & Smoyak, S. A. (2005).
Perceptions of cyberstalking among college students. Brief Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 5, 279289.
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2013). Personal Safety Survey. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.
Australian Human Rights Commission. (2012). Working without fear:
Results of the Sexual Harassment National Telephone Survey. Sydney: Australian Human Rights Commission.
Australian Law Reform Commission. (2014). Inquiry into Serious
Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era. Retrieved from http://
www.alrc.gov.au/publications/serious-invasions-privacy-digitalera-alrc-report-123
Ballard, M. E., & Welch, K. M. (in press). Virtual warfare cyberbullying and cyber-victimization in MMOG Play. Games and Culture.
Barak, A. (2005). Sexual harassment on the internet. Social Science
Computer Review, 23, 7792.
Bartlett, J., Norrie, R., Patel, S., Rumpel, R., & Wibberley, S. (2014).
Misogyny on Twitter. Demos. Retrieved from http://www.demos.
co.uk/files/MISOGYNY_ON_TWITTER.pdf
Baumgartner, S. E., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2010). Unwanted
online sexual solicitation and risky sexual online behavior across

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

12

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

the lifespan. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 31,
439447.
Beech, A. R., Elliott, I. A., Birgden, A., & Findlater, D. (2008). The
internet and child sexual grooming: A criminological review.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 13, 216228.
Bennett, D. C., Guran, E. L., Ramos, M. C., & Margolin, G.
(2011). College students electronic victimization in friendships and dating relationships: Anticipated distress and associations with risky behaviors. Violence and Victims, 26,
410429.
Bluett-Boyd, N., Fileborn, B., Quadara, A., & Moore, S. (2013). The
role of emerging communication technologies in experiences of
sexual violence: A new legal frontier? (Research Report No. 23).
Melbourne: Australian Institute of Family Studies.
Blumenfeld, W. J., & Cooper, R. M. (2010). LGBT and allied youth
responses to cyberbullying: Policy implications. The International
Journal of Critical Pedagogy, 3, 114133.
Borrajo, E., Gamez-Guadix, M., & Calvete, E. (2015). Cyber dating
abuse: Prevalence, context, and relationship with offline dating
aggression. Psychological Reports, 116, 565585.
Bossler, A. M., Holt, T. J., & May, D. C. (2012). Predicting online
harassment victimization among a juvenile population. Youth &
Society, 44, 500523.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013). National Crime Victimization
Survey (NCVS). Washington, DC: US Department of Justice.
Burke, S. C., Wallen, M., Vail-Smith, K., & Knox, D. (2011). Using
technology to control intimate partners: An exploratory study of
college undergraduates. Computers in Human Behavior, 27,
11621167.
Burkett, M. (2015). A qualitative analysis of young adults negotiations of the pleasures and perils of sexting. Sexuality and Culture,
19, 835863.
Cavezza, C., & McEwan, T. E. (2014). Cyberstalking versus offline stalking in a forensic sample. Psychology, Crime & Law, 20, 955970.
Chaulk, K., & Jones, T. (2011). Online obsessive relational intrusion:
Further concerns about Facebook. Journal of Family Violence, 26,
245254.
Citron, D. K. (2014). Hate crimes in cyberspace. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Connell, R. W. (1987). Gender and power: Society, the person and
sexual politics. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Cooper, A., Delmonico, D. L., Griffin-Shelley, E., & Mathy, R. M.
(2004). Online sexual activity: An examination of potentially problematic behaviors. Sexual Addiction and Compulsivity, 11, 29143.
Coyne, I., Chesney, T., Logan, B., & Madden, N. (2009). Griefing in a
virtual community: An exploratory survey of second life residents.
Journal of Psychology, 217, 214221.
Craven, S., Brown, S., & Gilchrist, E. (2006). Sexual grooming of
children: Review of literature and theoretical considerations.
Journal of Sexual Aggression, 12, 287299.
Crofts, T., Lee, M., McGovern, A., & Milivojevic, S. (2015). Sexting
and young people. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cyber Civil Rights Initiative. (2014). Effects of revenge porn survey.
Retrieved from http://www.endrevengeporn.org
Darvell, M. J., Walsh, S. P., & White, K. M. (2011). Facebook tells me
so: Applying the theory of planned behavior to understand partner-

monitoring behavior on Facebook. Cyberpsychology, Behavior,
and Social Networking, 14, 717722.
Department of Justice Canada. (2002). Voyeurism as a criminal
offense: A consultation paper. Retrieved from http://www.justice.
gc.ca/eng/cons/voy/
Dimond, J. P., Fiesler, C., & Bruckman, A. S. (2011). Domestic violence and information communication technologies. Interacting
with Computers, 23, 413421.
Draucker, C. B., & Martsolf, D. S. (2010). The role of electronic
communication technology in adolescent dating violence.
Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing, 23,
133142.
Dreing, H., Bailer, J., Anders, A., Wagner, H., & Gallas, C. (2014).
Cyberstalking in a large sample of social network users: Prevalence, characteristics, and impact upon victims. Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 17, 6167.
Drouin, M., Ross, J., & Tobin, E. (2015). Sexting: A new digital
vehicle for intimate partner aggression? Computers in Human
Behavior, 50, 197204.
Drouin, M., & Tobin, E. (2014). Unwanted but consensual sexting
among young adults. Computers in Human Behavior, 31,
412418.
Englander, E. (2015). Coerced sexting and revenge porn among teens.
Bullying, Teen Aggression & Social Media, 1, 1921.
Fenaughty, J., & Harre, N. (2013). Factors associated with distressing
electronic harassment and cyber bullying. Computers in Human
Behavior, 29, 803811.
Finn, J. (2004). A survey of online harassment at a university campus.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 19, 468.
Fox, J., & Tang, W. Y. (2014). Sexism in online video games: The role
of conformity to masculine norms and social dominance orientation. Computers in Human Behavior, 33, 314320.
Gamez-Guadix, M., Almendros, C., Borrajo, E., & Calvete, E. (2015).
Prevalence and association of sexting and online sexual victimization among Spanish adults. Sexuality Research and Social Policy,
12, 145154.
Goodson, P., McCormick, D., & Evans, A. (2001). Searching for
sexually explicit materials on the internet: An exploratory study
of college students behavior and attitudes. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 30, 101118.
Gordon-Messer, D., Bauermeister, J. A., Grodzinski, A., & Zimmerman, M. (2012). Sexting among young adults. Journal of Adolescent Health, 52, 301306.
Gov.uk. (2015). Hundreds of victims of revenge porn seek support
from helpline. Press Release: 23 August. Retrieved from https://
www.gov.uk/government/news/hundreds-of-victims-of-revengeporn-seek-support-from-helpline
Gray, K. L. (2012). Intersecting oppressions and online communities.
Information, Communication & Society, 15, 411428.
Henry, N., & Powell, A. (2014). The dark side of the virtual world:
Towards a digital sexual ethics. In N. Henry & A. Powell (Eds.),
Preventing sexual violence: Interdisciplinary approaches to overcoming a rape culture (pp. 84104). Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.
Henry, N., & Powell, A. (2015a). Beyond the sext: Technologyfacilitated sexual violence and harassment against adult women.

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

Henry and Powell

13

Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology, 48,
104118.
Henry, N., & Powell, A. (2015b). Embodied harms: Gender, shame
and technologyfacilitated sexual violence in cyberspace. Violence
Against Women, 21, 758779.
Hinduja, S., & Patchin, J. W. (2008). Cyberbullying: An exploratory
analysis of factors related to offending and victimization. Deviant
Behavior, 29, 129156.
Klettke, B., Hallford, D. J., & Mellor, D. J. (2014). Sexting prevalence
and correlates: A systematic literature review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 34, 4453.
Kuznekoff, J. H., & Rose, L. M. (2013). Communication in multiplayer gaming: Examining player responses to gender cues. New
Media & Society, 15, 541556.
Lindsay, M., Booth, J. M., Messing, J. T., & Thaller, J. (in press).
Experiences of online harassment among emerging adults emotional reactions and the mediating role of fear. Journal of Interpersonal Violence.
Lindsay, M., & Krysik, J. (2012). Online harassment among college
students: A replication incorporating new Internet trends. Information, Communication & Society, 15, 703719.
Lounsbury, K., Mitchell, K. J., & Finkelhor, D. (2011). The true prevalence of sexting. Crimes Against Children Research Center,
14.
Lyndon, A., Bonds-Raacke, J., & Cratty, A. D. (2011). College students Facebook stalking of ex-partners. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14, 711716.
Marcum, C. D., Higgins, G. E., & Ricketts, M. (2010). Assessing sex
experiences of online victimization: An examination of adolescent
online behaviors using routine activity theory. Criminal Justice
Review, 35, 412437.
Martin, J., & Alaggia, R. (2013). Sexual abuse images in cyberspace:
Expanding the ecology of the child. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse,
22, 398415.
McAfee. (2013). Lovers beware: Scorned exes may share intimate
data and images online. Retrieved from http://www.mcafee.com/
au/about/news/2013/q1/20130204-01.aspx
McAfee. (2014). Study reveals majority of adults share intimate
details via unsecured digital devices. Retrieved from http://
www.mcafee.com/au/about/news/2014/q1/20140204-01.aspx
Meyer, R., & Cukier, M. (2006). Assessing the attack threat due to
IRC channels. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks. Retrieved from http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi10.1.1.89.3613&rep
rep1&typepdf
Mitchell, K. J., Finkelhor, D., Jones, L. M., & Wolak, J. (2012). Prevalence and characteristics of youth sexting: A national study.
Pediatrics, 129, 1320.
Mitchell, K. J., Jones, L. M., Finkelhor, D., & Wolak, J. (2011).
Internet-facilitated commercial sexual exploitation of children:
Findings from a nationally representative sample of law enforcement agencies in the United States. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of
Research and Treatment, 23, 4371.
National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy and
Cosmogirl.com study. (2008). Sex and tech: Results from a survey

of teens and young adults. Retrieved from https://thenationalcam
paign.org/resource/sex-and-tech
Office for National Statistics (UK). (2014). Crime statistics, focus on
violent crime and sexual offences, 2012/13. Newport, OR: Office
for National Statistics.
Parliament of the United Kingdom Communications Committee.
(2014). Social media and criminal offences First Report. Retrieved
from http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201415/ldselect/
ldcomuni/37/37.pdf
Patrick, K., Heywood, W., Pitts, M. K., & Mitchell, A. (in press).
Demographic and behavioural correlates of six sexting behaviours
among Australian secondary school students. Sexual Health.
Pew Research Center. (2014). Online harassment. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/10/22/online-harassment/
Powell, A. (2010). Configuring consent: Emerging technologies,
unauthorised sexual images and sexual assault. Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Criminology, 43, 7679.
Powell, A., & Henry, N. (in press). Policing technology-facilitated
sexual violence against adult victims: Police and service sector
perspectives. Policing and Society.
Reyns, B. W., Henson, B., & Fisher, B. S. (2012). Stalking in the
twilight zone: Extent of cyberstalking victimization and offending
among college students. Deviant Behavior, 33, 125.
Reyns, B. W., Burek, M. W., Henson, B., & Fisher, B. S. (2013). The
unintended consequences of digital technology: Exploring the relationship between sexting and cybervictimization. Journal of Crime
and Justice, 36, 117.
Ringrose, J., Gill, R., Livingstone, S., & Harvey, L. (2012). A qualitative study of children, young people and sexting. Report prepared for the NSPCC. Retrieved from http://www.nspcc.org.uk/
Inform/resourcesforprofessionals/sexualabuse/sexting-researchreport_wdf89269.pdf
Sheridan, L. P., & Grant, T. (2007). Is cyberstalking different? Psychology, Crime & Law, 13, 627640.
Shorey, R. C., Cornelius, T. L., & Strauss, C. (2015). Stalking in
college student dating relationships: A descriptive investigation.
Journal of Family Violence, 30, 935942.
Spitzberg, B. H., & Cupach, W. R. (2007). The state of the art of
stalking: Taking stock of the emerging literature. Aggression and
Violent Behavior, 12, 6486.
Spitzberg, B. H., & Cupach, W. R. (2014). The dark side of relationship pursuit: From attraction to obsession and stalking. London,
England: Routledge.
Spitzberg, B. H., & Hoobler, G. (2002). Cyberstalking and technologies of interpersonal terrorism. New Media Society, 4, 7192.
Staude-Muller, F., Hansen, B., & Voss, M. (2012). How stressful is online
victimisation? Effects of victims personality and properties of the incident. European Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 260274.
Stonard, K. E., Bowen, E., Lawrence, T. R., & Price, S. A. (2014). The
relevance of technology to the nature, prevalence and impact of
adolescent dating violence and abuse: A research synthesis.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 19, 390417.
Thompson, M. P., & Morrison, D. J. (2013). Prospective predictors of
technology-based sexual coercion by college males. Psychology of
Violence, 3, 233246.

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

14

TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE

Tokunaga, R. S., & Aune, K. S. (in press). Cyber-defense: A taxonomy of tactics for managing cyberstalking. Journal of Interpersonal Violence.
Victorian Law Reform Committee. (2013). Inquiry into Sexting. Melbourne, Australia: Department of Justice, State Government of
Victoria. Retrieved from http://www.parliament.vic.gov.au/file_
uploads/LRC_Sexting_Final_Report_0c0rvqP5.pdf
Walker, S., Sanci, L., & TempleSmith, M. (2013). Sexting: Young
womens and mens views on its nature and origins. Journal of
Adolescent Health, 52, 697701.
Weston-Scheuber, K. (2012). Gender and the prohibition of hate
speech. QUT Law & Justice Journal, 12, 132150.
Wright, B. (2015). Revenge porn in Japan: 110 reports in 1 month
despite countrywide ban, survey finds. International Business
Times. 2 April. Retrieved from http://www.ibtimes.com/revengeporn-japan-110-reports-1-month-despite-countrywide-ban-surveyfinds-1867776
World Health Organization. (2011). Violence against womenIntimate partner and sexual violence against women. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
World Health Organization. (2013). Global and regional estimates of
violence against women: Prevalence an health effects of intimate
partner violence and non-partner sexual violence. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
Woodlock, D. (in press). The abuse of technology in domestic violence and stalking. Violence Against Women.
Ybarra, M. L., Espelage, D. L., & Mitchell, K. J. (2007). The cooccurrence of Internet harassment and unwanted sexual
solicitation victimization and perpetration: Associations with
psychosocial indicators. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41,
S31S41.

Zweig, J. M., Dank, M., Yahner, J., & Lachman, P. (2013). The rate of
cyber dating abuse among teens and how it relates to other forms of
teen dating violence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 42,
10631077.

Author Biographies
Nicola Henry is a senior lecturer in Crime, Justice and Legal Studies
at La Trobe University, Melbourne (Australia). Nicolas research
spans a range of fields, including violence against women, gender,
memory, transitional justice, and international criminal law. Her
books include War and Rape: Law, Memory and Justice (Routledge,
2011), Preventing Sexual Violence: Interdisciplinary Approaches to
Overcoming a Rape Culture (edited with Dr. Anastasia Powell, Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), Rape Justice: Beyond the Criminal Law
(edited with Dr. Anastasia Powell & Dr. Asher Flynn, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015), and Sex, Violence and Justice in a digital Era (with Dr.
Anastasia Powell, Palgrave Macmillan, forthcoming).
Anastasia Powell is a senior lecturer in Justice and Legal Studies at
RMIT University, Melbourne (Australia). Anastasias research specializes in policy and prevention concerning violence against women.
Her books include Sex, Power and Consent: Youth Culture and the
Unwritten Rules (Cambridge University Press, 2010), Domestic Violence: Australian Public Policy (coauthored with Dr. Suellen Murray,
Australian Scholarly Publishing, 2011), Rape Justice: Beyond the
Criminal Law (edited with Dr. Nicola Henry & Dr. Flynn, Palgrave
Macmillan, 2015), and Sex, Violence and Justice in a Digital Era
(with Dr. Nicola Henry, Palgrave Macmillan, forthcoming). Anastasia
has recently completed an Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery project (with Dr. Nicola Henry) titled: Technology-facilitated
sexual violence and harassment: Violence against women in cyberspace and the implications for legislative and policy reform.

Downloaded from tva.sagepub.com at CHINESE UNIV HONG KONG LIB on June 20, 2016

