Communication, Culture & Critique ISSN 1753-9129

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Toward a Political Economic Framework
for Analyzing Digital Development Games:
A Case Study of Three Games for Africa
Jolene Fisher
School of Journalism and Communication, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA

This study analyzes 3 digital games for development in Africa, examining them as individual texts that operate as part of a broader international development discourse, and as
political economic products with implications for international development and gaming
industries. A conceptual framework is proposed as part of this process. By looking at individual games alongside the organizations and funding structures behind them, I argue that
digital games, as a new technological platform, do not in-and-of themselves present a revolutionary approach to development across Africa; rather, they both reinforce and subvert
dominant approaches already at play.
Keywords: Digital Development Games, Games, Gamification, Development, Neoliberalism.
doi:10.1111/cccr.12128

In the 10 years since the release of the UN World Food Programmes downloadable PC game Food Forcebilled as the first-ever humanitarian aid video gamethe
production of digital games for use within the international development industry
has expanded substantially. While the earliest Digital Development Games (DDGs)
focused on raising awareness about development and humanitarian aid issues by targeting students in the Global North, more recent versions have been designed to
carry out on-the-ground development work in countries such as Kenya and Tanzania.
Celebrated as the next frontier for advocacy and aid groups, international organizations are looking to DDGs as a radical new approach to development. But, despite
enthusiasm for the potential of games as educational and behavior change tools, little
attention has been paid to the development ideologies embedded within them. Thus,

Corresponding author: Jolene Fisher; e-mail: ijf@uoregon.edu
30

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

an important question remains: While digital games certainly present a new technological channel for carrying out development projects, do they present a radically new
approach to conceptualizing and enacting the development process?
In this study, I argue that the gamification of the development industry must
be understood as a process of productive purpose in which games, embedded with particular development ideologies, are used in an attempt to generate
development-oriented results in nongame contexts (Rughinis, 2013). Whether they
are effective in achieving them or not, understanding the intended results of games
through an analysis of their narratives, procedural rhetoric, and political economic
foundations is imperative in order to expose the development ideologies and agendas
embedded in DDGs designed for use across Africa, where they come from, and what
they mean for the industry at large. Further, DDGs must be understood as political
economic products, which, imbricated in both a global gaming and global development industry, inculcate or challenge the established knowledge/power hierarchies of
a global development system. While DDGs do present a new technological platform
for carrying out development projects, they do not in-and-of themselves present
a revolutionary approach to conceptualizing or enacting development across the
African continent; rather, they both reinforce and subvert the dominant approaches
already at play.
How games will save Africa! (even if radio, satellite, and the Internet could
not  )

Although the potential for digital games to be used as effective educational and
behavior change tools has been well documented (Gee, 2005; Shaffer, 2004), a
decades worth of DDGs suggests it is not, as predicted by social-cause game developer Jane McGonigal (2010), as easy to save the world in real life as it is in games.
Indeed, analysis of the use of digital games for education and international development shows decidedly mixed results in terms of project outcomes. While the
current field is relatively small (approximately 30 games), the funds provided for,
and media attention around, recent DDG projects indicate future growth. The use
of such games to disseminate educational messages, expose people to new ideas, and
facilitate behavior change at the individual level is, understandably, of interest to the
international development industry, which has long looked to mass communication
technologies to accomplish such tasks (Lerner, 1958; Melkote & Steeves, 2001;
Rao, 1963; Rogers, 1973, 1976; Schramm, 1964; Shaffer, 2004; Singhal & Rogers,
1999). However, research that focuses only on the effectiveness of DDGs would be
shortsighted; rather, critical attention must be paid to the ideological frames and
development narratives embedded within DDGs, as well as the political economic
implications of the production behind them, to make clear how DDGs are used to
further specific development agendas and whose interests they serve (Bogost, 2006;
Escobar, 1984; Wilkins, 1999; Wilkins & Enghel, 2013). Two levels of analysis are
necessary to accomplish this. The first considers games as texts.
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

31

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

Game studies scholars argue that a critical textual analysis of games is not
only possible, it is necessary (Bogost, 2006; Fernandez-Vara, 2015; Flanagan,
2009; Flanagan & Nissenbaum, 2014). The meaning created both within games,
meaningful play, and around them, cultural significance, lends itself to textual
interpretation (Fernandez-Vara, 2015, p. 6), and the ethical and political values
embedded in games by designers (whether intentional or not) necessitate a critical
approach to these texts (Bogost, 2006; Flanagan, 2009; Flanagan & Nissenbaum,
2014). Unveiling the pattern of beliefs that have been worked into a text, along with
whose interests are represented by it, is achieved through a close analysis of the text
itself along with a description of the relationships that exist between the artifact and
its context (Foss, 2009).
Thus, a critical textual analysis of DDGs must be grounded in the broader development industry discourse, beginning with the term development itself, which has
long defied any singular definition. Generally assumed to be an intentional process
meant to improve quality of life and create beneficial social change, consensus on
what beneficial change looks like, who is in the best position to enact it, how it should
be done, and for whom is lacking (Escobar, 1984; Melkote & Steeves, 2001; Parpart,
Rai, & Staudt, 2002; Wilkins & Mody, 2001). The debate over the term development,
then, is really a struggle over the shape of futures (Nederveen Pieterse, 2009,
p. xviii), with processes such as globalization and the spread of neoliberalism playing
a role in how this debate is framed, legitimizing certain futures over others. Although
often challenged, the dominant future in the development field has been based
on modernization, which prioritizes capitalist economic development, promotes
rationality and objectivity in individuals, and emphasizes technology acquisition and
industrialization (Melkote & Steeves, 2001).
Alternative perspectives have critiqued the ethnocentrism of the dominant
modernization paradigm, calling for more holistic and contextual approaches
that take into account the roles of gender, the environment, religion, and indigenous knowledge in creating sustainable development solutions. Whether feminist,
environmental, theological, and/or grassroots in nature, these critical approaches
work to disrupt the top-down hierarchical structure of a Western-development
model and move beyond economic definitions of development. Nonetheless,
approaches based on theories of modernization and neoliberal economics remain
dominant within the worlds largest development institutions, such as the
World Bank (WB).
Trends and changes in the global development landscape impact how issues and
solutions are framed within the discourse (Wilkins, 2000, 2008). For instance, the rise
of celebrity advocacy, causumerism, and clicktivismseen perhaps most easily
in U2 frontman Bonos global (RED) campaignhas led to an emphasis on compassionate consumption and capitalist solutions to development problems. Although
it has gained mainstream popularity, development scholars argue such an approach
works to not only erase, but to in fact re-create and reproduce the productive forces
behind global inequality (Cameron & Haanstra, 2008; Kapoor, 2013; Wilkins &
32

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

Enghel, 2013). Similarly, enthusiastic discourse about the magical potential of
the Internet to act as a democratizing force in closing information gaps accelerated the scale of development projects based on information and communication
technologies and the promise of a painless transition to modernity through technology (Chakravartty, 2009, p. 37). But such a discourse has simultaneously erased
the effects of growing inequalities in access to technology (Leye, 2009; Ogan et al.,
2009; Wilkins & Enghel, 2013). The discourse around and within DDGs, the newest
development trend, must be given similar critical attention.
DDGs must likewise be understood as material products produced within
a specific sociohistorical and economic context (Fernandez-Vara, 2015). As the
multibillion-dollar global digital games industry continues to grow at a rate unparalleled by the rest of the entertainment industry, it is necessary to consider the political
economic implications of the production of DDGs, especially as smaller game developers and development organizations create products alongside large international
bodies and private game corporations. Without attention to the asymmetrical structures of power at play in their design and production, DDGs risk replicating issues
seen in earlier Information Communication Technology (ICT) projects, including
the continuation of problematic top-down, one-way information structures; the
incorporation of gender biases that further entrench existing social issues; the
sustainment of knowledge monopolies that privilege Western ways of knowing;
and the erasure of important local contexts and needs (Kwami, Wolf-Monteiro, &
Steeves, 2011). The uneven flows of images and capital produced by the complex
processes of a globalized media industry, of which digital games are a large part, are
important to analyze as they create new configurations of power and produce new
subject positions, new forms of oppression (and resistance), and new instruments
of power/knowledge  that cut across political, national and racial boundaries in
unexpected ways (Shome & Hegde, 2002, p. 176).
Considered the media of Empire in the 21st century, digital gameplay often
works in favor of global hypercapitalism as it trains flexible personalities for flexible
jobs, shapes subjects for militarized markets, and makes becoming a neoliberal subject
fun (Dyer-Witheford & De Peuter, 2009, pp. xxixxxx); but it also offers the possibility for alternatives to, or ways out of, the system. Digital games are worthy of our
attention as they have the potential to shape work, learning, health care and more,
including the field of international development (Flanagan & Nissenbaum, 2014, p. 3).
The DDGs analyzed in this article were created to facilitate development across
Africa, which, historically, has been a major target of projects spanning the spectrum
of media innovations: From radio, to satellite television, to ICT projects, each new
innovation has been latched onto as the key to developing the continent (Melkote
& Steeves, 2001). Enthusiasm for the transformative potential of DDGs has been no
less, but, like technologies before them, it remains unclear whether games present a
radically new approach to development, or simply a new technological platform for
replicating traditional projects. Although DDGs have been produced by a variety
of organizations to tackle a range of development issues, an overview of the field
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

33

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

indicates broad similarities in terms of purpose and intent. Thus, understanding
how DDGs operate individually and in relation to one another is a necessary step in
analyzing the use and implications of Digital Games for Development (DG4D).

Toward a political economic framework for game analysis

The gamification of the development industry must be understood as more than a
simple system of applied game mechanics and game elements (i.e., point systems and
progress bars) to nongame development activities; rather, it is a process of productive
purpose in which games are used to produce specific development-oriented results
in nongame contexts (Rughinis, 2013). If gamification is understood as designing
technology-with-intent, then, intent matters (Rughinis, 2013, p. 4). Thus, as DDGs
are integrated into the system as a way to conduct or do development, replacing traditional projects that would previously have been carried out in a nongame context, it
is necessary to understand them as technology-with-intent, and to critically analyze
what that intent is. The productive purpose of DDGs can be broken down into three
main areas: games meant to teach an audience how to do development; to actually
develop an audience; or to highlight issues of inequality and engage an audience in
critique. To that end, this study proposes a political economic framework comprised
of three categories to be used as a tool for understanding and analyzing DDGs across
the African continent and beyond.
The first category, Developing Developers (DD), encompasses games that present
an audience located primarily in the Global North with development issues situated
in the Global South. While the specific projects vary, the purpose of DD games is to
construct for players an understanding of developmentwhat it should look like,
how it should be done and who should be in control of itas well as to call on players
as actors in the development process within the game and beyond. The second,
Digital Interventions (DI), is made up of games intended for use as on-the-ground
development interventions. The purpose of DI games is to develop individuals living in the Global South, using digital formats as a new avenue for carrying out health,
education, and skills-based projects. The final category, Critical Play (CP), is made
up of games that address structural inequality as the root cause of underdevelopment and ask players to engage in critique and conceptualize solutions outside of the
current system. The purpose of CP games is to challenge local and global power structures through gameplay and educate players about systemic issues that exacerbate
development issues.
I argue that DDGs must be understood as political economic products that carry
an embedded development narrative to a target audience and, in this way, further a
particular development agenda. Analyzing games according to their position in the
framework proposed here is an important step in this process as it highlights the
games productive purpose. By asking whether a game is attempting to Develop Developers act as a Development Intervention, or engage an audience in Critical Play, an
34

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

important motive is identified. Thus, this study analyzes one game, and the organization responsible for its production, to illustrate each of the three categories. The
analysis presented here is only a first stepmore studies applying the framework
could help refine it while further illuminating how political economic issues of production influence the types of games created.
Digital interventions: The World Bank Institute and Urgent EVOKE

The World Bank (WB), referred to as the foremost international development
agency (Payer, 1982, p. 15), has historically worked in tandem with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) to lend money to the Global South. This control of resources
and influence over borrowing nations has allowed the WB to wield great authority in
directing the path of international development and global policy discourse on a host
of issues within a neoliberal framework (Adhikary, 2014; Holman, 1984; Klees, 2012;
Spring, 2009). Critics of the WB argue its emphasis on the marketization of services
such as healthcare and education promotes competition, excellence, efficiency,
expenditure, and economic rate of return while undercutting the sociopolitical
role and disruptive potential of social goods (Adhikary, 2014, p. 4). The World
Bank Institute (WBI) operates as an implementation arm for the WB and, rather
than focusing on relationships with local governments, emphasizes new forms of
development collaboration that include publicprivate partnerships for things like
heath and education (World Bank Institute, n.d.). Within this marketized framework,
education becomes an asset that allows individuals to secure competitive advantage
in a global capitalist system; the role of such an asymmetrical economic system in
exacerbating global inequalities in education, however, is elided (Adhikary, 2014;
Tarabini, 2010). This marketized, neoliberal approach to development can be seen at
play in the WBIs 2010 game Urgent EVOKE (EVOKE).
Designed by award-winning game designer Jane McGonigal, EVOKE was created
to help empower people all over the world to come up with creative solutions to
our most urgent social problems (Urgent EVOKE, 2010). Online and free to play,
EVOKE offered a new approach for including youth across sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA), its target demographic, in the development process by inviting them to voice
their own ideas about, and solutions to, specific development issues. Certainly, the
potential for EVOKE to generate a new space for participation by stakeholders in the
development process was exciting, but in reality the constraints on such participation
were significant and the game all but failed in reaching its target demographic.
Further, the WBIs narrow definition of game success framed development issues
and solutions within a neoliberal framework that greatly constrained the context in
which players were able to participate.
The 19,386 people from across the world who registered to play EVOKE were
tasked with 10 missions, covering topics such as social innovation, food security, the
future of money, empowering women, and preserving indigenous knowledge (Gaible
& Dabla, 2010). Players completed missions in three phases by contributing blog posts
or uploading pictures and videos as evidence of what they had learned about the
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

35

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

weeks issue, how they were taking action in their communities to address it, and how
they would act locally/and or globally in the future. Although nearly 20,000 players registered, only 1,529 were from SSA: 1,010 of these players were from South
Africa, while the other 519 were from the rest of the SSA countries combined (Gaible
& Dabla, 2010). Compared to the 9,577 players in the United States, or the 1,672 in
Canada, the number of players from the target demographic seems scarce. A strategic
communication campaign, used to advertise the game and secure relationships with
high-schools and universities, was responsible for the higher number of players in
South Africa, but the barriers to play for those not in these classrooms were many.
Beyond reliable access to the Internet, issues of gender, language skills, and social
class affected who got to play: EVOKE was programmed in English only; it required
access to additional technological resources and equipment skills in order to create
and post evidence; and it necessitated Web 2.0 skills, which require a high level of
Internet literacy. Users with these skills and access are more likely to be university
students and on this account and on others, are likely to be members of privileged,
if not elite, groups within their countries (Gaible & Dabla, 2010, p. 32). EVOKE was
designed to empower the youth of SSA by facilitating access to knowledge and social
networks, however, the material and immaterial resources necessary for access were
beyond the reach of the majority of SSA youth, ultimately precluding the WBIs target
demographic from participating and further entrenching existing information/power
structures.
The development ideology embedded in the game acts as its own constraint to participation as it narrowly defines success within the game world and beyond. According
to the games executive producer Robert Hawkins, EVOKEs success was measured
by player development of a set of specific 21st-century skills in relation to social
innovation (Gaible & Dabla, 2010, p. 11). These skills, which are laid out as a list
of powers on the games website, evoke a neoliberal sensibility that emphasizes market skills and individual resourcefulness as key to solving broad social problems. For
instance, entrepreneurship is defined as the power to Achieve goals with sound
business strategy. Focus on innovation and large-scale transformation. Make your
idea financially sustainable. Create something that will thrive for a long time; the
power of local insight challenges players to Know your market. Meet local needs
and build on local assets. Create solutions that fit the community; and to gain the
power of resourcefulness players must Make something out of nothing. Rise to
the occasion no matter what (Urgent EVOKE, 2010). In this context, development is
achieved through widespread expansion and support of the market, and development
is the responsibility of individuals who must gain the necessary skills for market participation and then make something out of nothing. The 21st-century higher-order
thinking skills that the EVOKE powers are based on include: information literacy;
problem solving; the discovery, use, and citing of facts and information, and; communication and collaboration skills (especially those provided by Web 2.0 tools), as
well as soft skills important to leadership, such as empathy [italics added for emphasis]
(Gaible & Dabla, 2010, p. 11).
36

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

A primary goal of modernization has always been to bring specific technological
skills to populations in order to promote national economic growth and individual
behavior change. Indeed, the need for traditional populations to acquire empathy was
one of Daniel Lerners (1958)the original pioneer of modernizationkey prerequisites for transition to the modern world.
EVOKEs powers are based on a framework from the Partnership for 21st Century
Skills, a U.S. organization that advocates for educational policy change at the local,
federal, and state level to shift the conversation for kids and ensure theyre ready to
lead and take on the challenges of the 21st century (Partnership, Partnership for
21st Century Skills, n.d.). The partnerships board, which has included AOL, Apple,
Dell, Cable in the Classroom, Cisco, Ford Motor Company, Intel, Microsoft, and
The Walt Disney Company, has a vested interest in creating citizens with Web 2.0
skills who value technological innovation, who appreciate and engage with a global
economy, and who rely on media and technology systems to do so. Thus, furthering
the expansion of these skills in developing regions via an online game serves the
interests of both the Partnership for 21st Century Skills and the WBI well. A postgame
evaluation recommends that EVOKE be framed as a transitional intervention, one
that channels university students, recent graduates, and other young, socially minded
individuals into development-focused activities and careers (Gaible & Dabla, 2010,
p. 40), a move that would certainly shift the focus from empowering people all over
the world to come up with solutions to world problems to creating an NGO social
class of educated individuals from particular privileged backgrounds. If the WBI
follows the postgame evaluations recommendations to engage further with students,
coordinate with university calendars, develop orientation guides for teachers to use,
and model future projects on the success of the partnerships with classrooms in
South Africa, it certainly has the potential to become more involved in developing
global educational curriculum and policy, especially in the Global South.
Although EVOKE theoretically created a new space for stakeholder participation in the development process, such participation was inhibited by material and
immaterial constraints. While it is important to consider how and why the WBI
missed its target demographic almost entirely, it is even more important to consider
how EVOKE, as a DI game, reflects and reinforces the neoliberal development
agenda of the WBI. By defining game success according to a skill set that emphasizes
entrepreneurship, market participation, and reliance on technology above all else, the
game acts as an on-the-ground development intervention that reinforces a problematic development approach in which all elements of social life, including education,
are taken up in the market.
DD: The Half the Sky Movement: The Game

Based on the best-selling book Half the Sky: Turning Oppression Into Opportunity
for Women Worldwide, published in 2009 by journalists Nicholas Kristof and Sheryl
WuDunn, the U.S.-based Half the Sky Movement (HTSM) has developed into a
multidonor, multimedia initiative that seeks to ignite the change needed to put
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

37

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

an end to the oppression of women and girls worldwide (Half the Sky Movement,
n.d.a). Like the book, the HTSM focuses on challenges faced by women around the
world and outlines specific solutions in the fight to end female oppression, which it
refers to as the central moral challenge of our time (Half the Sky Movement, n.d.b).
The purpose of the HTSM is to galvanize audiences around a set of issues Kristof
and WuDunn have identified as causes of, or ways out of, the systemic oppression
of women and girls, including forced prostitution, sex trafficking, gender-based
violence, maternal mortality, economic empowerment, and education. The HTSMs
focus on women and economic empowerment as a key to solving a host of development issues is reflective of a mainstream Women in Development (WID) approach
in which arguments based on efficiency are used to highlight womens potential as
economic producers and the benefits women bring to development when they are
included in economic processes. But critics of the WID approach have argued this
focus on women and productivity has in fact created greater inequality for women
(Kabeer, 1994; Moser, 1989; Razavi & Miller, 1995).
Although it received ample praise from the mainstream, the Half the Sky book was
called out by critics for a variety of issues including the oversimplification of complex
problems, problematic issues of power and consent that accompany the voyeuristic
expose techniques used to tell the stories of young rape victims, and an overall white
savior mentality that provides solutions while failing to explore the transnational
contexts and global power structures that exacerbate development issues. The more
recent HTSM and its accompanying multimedia products perpetuate many of the
problematic approaches and assumptions of the 2009 text. Pertinent to this study is the
Half the Sky Movement: The Game (HTSMG), which was developed for Facebook and
programmed in English and French for play on desktop and laptop computers. Four
months after its 2013 launch, the HTSMG had reached 1 million players, and mainstream media outlets were hailing video games as the new frontier for activism and
social change (Sydell, 2013). The HTSMG was created as an awareness and fundraising tool to support the HTSM in its mission to empower women and girls around
the world, (Half the Sky Movement: The Game, 2012) and, according to the developers, it is the first game to introduce direct virtual-to-real-life translation (Frima, n.d.).
Developed by Frima (the largest Canadian-owned game studio), the HTSMG is meant
to target a mainstream, social-media-savvy audience in an attempt to educate players
about the challenges faced by women and girls around the globe. The game presents
players with real-world challenges, and invites them to become part of the solution through issue-specific actions that support the HTSMs nonprofit partners (Half
the Sky Movement: The Game, 2012).
In the HTSMG, players join Radhika, an Indian woman, on a journey from
oppression to opportunity as she completes a series of quests in her hometown and
then travels to help other women in Kenya, Vietnam, and Afghanistan, ending her
journey in the United States. The game begins with Radhika telling the player she is
unable to afford medicine for her sick child; the player then navigates through a series
of quests to earn the money necessary to purchase it. Gameplay happens in two ways:
38

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

In the first, players are able to choose one of two options presented at the end of a
brief interactive scene between Radhika and another game character; in the second,
players complete basic puzzle games in which similar items must be linked together
using the computers mouse. From selling mangoes in the market, to applying for
a microcredit loan, to buying a goat and starting a small business by selling the
milk it produces, the journey from oppression to opportunity that the player joins
Radhika on is one firmly rooted in economic self-help and entrepreneurship. Once
players have helped Radhika secure a loan to build an addition to her house, they
join her as she travels to her next destination: Kenya. When Radhika gets to Kenya
she goes directly to a rural clinic where she meets a nurse who informs her of the
high rates of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the country. She then meets
the nurses daughter who admits she has tested positive for HIV. Radhika next learns
about the high rates of malaria in Kenya and is asked to help the nurses decide if
they will sell the clinics supply of mosquito nets, or give them away for free to local
women and children and risk them being sold on the black market. Next, Radhika
helps the nurses at the clinic organize a community discussion about family planning
and the use of birth control, but she and her supporters are chased away by a group of
angry community members before their meeting is able to begin. Radhika eventually
moves through the other countries and ultimately ends up at the UN Headquarters in
the United States. But just getting from India to Kenya takes a substantial amount of
time and real money from the player: The game times-out after minimal gameplay,
forcing players to wait or pay to continue play.
The emphasis on women entering the market via microloans and small businesses woven throughout Radhikas story reflects a broader WID-based, neoliberal
development agenda that identifies poor women in the Global South as an untapped
resource and frames them as individual entrepreneurs responsible not only for their
own development but also for the development of society at large, regardless of the
various constraints (e.g., lack of material resources, skills, education, childcare) they
may face (Brown, 2003; Karim, 2011; Moser, 1989; Razavi & Miller, 1995). Rather
than questioning what negative effects a global capitalist system has on womens lives
(Aguilar & Lacsamana, 2004), the HTSMG encourages individual players to act as
model neoliberal citizens and find development solutions among the various social,
political, and economic options made available through it (Brown, 2003, p. 15). It
does not, however, ask them to join with others to alter or organize these options
(Brown, 2003, p. 15). Throughout the game, players are asked to participate in what
game developer Frima refers to as virtual-to-real-life translation by purchasing a
good or service identical to the one that has just been used in the game through one of
its seven nonprofit partners. For instance, after Radhika prospers from buying a goat
and selling its milk, the player is asked if she wants to help a woman in real-life by
purchasing a goat through Heifer International. By connecting these financial donations to the concept of womens empowerment, the game participates in what Dingo
(2012) refers to as the megarhetoric of empowerment: a mainstreamed, naturalized
discourse, in which it is assumed that womens empowerment is equal to womens
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

39

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

individual financial security. By unlocking material support through gameplay and
engaging with in-game donations and purchases, players are able to assume they have
empowered a poor woman in the Global South, and the player gains a sense of action
and of personal empowerment along the way. This positioning of the game player
supports a hierarchy of expertise, power, and agency, which rests with the women
who have the access, resources, and skills to play the game, and which constructs
them as most capable of directing and impacting the lives of women throughout the
Global South (Kwami et al., 2011).
If the solution to womens empowerment is indeed individual financial support,
there is little reason to consider broader political action once this support has been
given. Dingo (2012) argues that approaches to empowerment that focus on financial
exchange between individuals in the Global North and Global South reinforce the
notion of personal agency and monetary exchange over a broader feminist understanding of the transnational contexts that make donations, charity work, and development programs necessary in the first place (p. 177). While the game provides
players with information on key issues as identified by the HTSM (such as the number of women living in poverty and the number of people infected with HIV), there is
little given in the way of context: The women facing these issues are in India, Kenya,
Afghanistan, Vietnam, and the United States, but there is no explanation of regional
differences regarding these issues, or of why certain women are in poverty while others
are not, or how historical and current political and economic processes have impacted
such issues. The player might gain a better sense of scale regarding the issues identified
by the HTSM, but what she is unlikely to come away with is a nuanced understanding of either the potentially negative impacts processes like capitalism and globalization have on women in the developing world or the ways in which asymmetrical
North/South power structures contribute to the oppressive reality of women in the
developing world and exacerbate issues of inequality. Moreover, the HTSMG fails
to provide any meaningful discussion on the ways in which microlending practices
oppress women in new ways while simultaneously benefiting the middle class at the
expense of the poorest (Karim, 2011). Rather, because the player has given money
(either by directly donating funds herself or by unlocking material goods and services through gameplay), she can simply forget about the broader context of poverty
and feel assuaged by her or his action (Dingo, 2012, p. 177). Womens oppression
and inequality are thus presented to the player not as a challenge to a system that is
inherently asymmetrical, but instead as a depoliticized tool that promotes new market
subjects (Karim, 2011).
DD games present development issues situated in the Global South to a primarily
Northern audience while constructing for them a particular understanding of what
development should look like, how it should be done, and what their role is in it. In
the case of the HTSMG, development is achieved by individual women in the Global
South entering the global marketplace via microcredit loans and small businesses; the
role of the game player, situated in the Global North, is to facilitate that productivity
40

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

through material donations. This emphasis on private aid and individual empowerment aligns nicely with a broader neoliberal development agenda that reduces social
change to entrepreneurship in a market-based system, and civic involvement and
voice to clicktivism (Wilkins & Enghel, 2013, p. 169). When the concept of individual empowerment is emphasized above all else, the constraints that social inequalities
place on achieving individual success are erased, creating a depoliticized approach
that supports a neoliberal project, in which market-based exchanges are assumed to
be beneficial without serious critique (Wilkins & Enghel, 2013, p. 170).
CP: Afroes and Haki 2: Chaguo Ni Lako

Afroes, a Southern Africa mobile gaming company, was founded by Anne
Githuku-Shongwe to create uniquely African mobile content that is contextually relevant and easily accessible for youth audiences across the continent (Afroes,
n.d.). In a TEDx talk, Githuku-Shongwe (2012) argues that a lack of broad results
in Africa after some 50 years of international development projects is not due to a
lack of resources, rather it is because Africans are still limited by our own beliefs.
For change to occur, people must be able to reimagine Africa and, according to the
Afroes founder, this process can be accomplished through games (Githuku-Shongwe,
2012). With support from mLab, a mobile technology incubator for startups in
Southern Africa, Afroes developed a variety of mobile games designed to instill
messages of hope and possibility in young people through content that celebrates
Africas rich heritage (Afroes, n.d.; mLab, n.d.).
Unlike the previous games, which were created by large international organizations for broad and often dispersed audiences, Afroes games are designed to be contextually relevant and easily accessible to a Southern African youth audience. But, to
ensure that its content is accessible regardless of the class, economic status, or education level of its audience, it has been necessary for the local gaming company to
engage with a global capitalist system and partner with some of the largest communication corporations in the world. The high growth rate of mobile phones in Africa
gives games designed for a mobile platform the potential to reach a wide swath of
youth audiences in Afroes target markets of South Africa and Kenya; but the high
costs charged by mobile network operators to host games makes them prohibitively
expensive, thus limiting accessibility (Pitman, 2011). Thus, Afroes has partnered with
global corporations such as Microsoft, Vodacom, Samsung, and Nokia, as well as large
development organizations, and has engaged a variety of other funding and distribution strategies (e.g., using school systems to distribute games and licensing mobile
content to Ministries of Education and NGOs throughout Africa and other developing regions) in order address these cost issues.
Although Afroes participates in an unabashedly neoliberal project in order to
fund its content (see, for instance, Afroes recent partnership with the Digital Jobs
Africa initiative, a $100 million dollar Rockefeller Foundation project meant to
facilitate the growth of the tech sector across the continent), the discourse offered up
by the organization on how to affect social change and the game content it produces
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

41

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

move far beyond a neoliberal framework. Indeed, Afroes conceptualization of social
change is one based on civic participation, institutional change, and a critique of
current global processes. Rather than focusing on fixing a problem, the organization emphasizes shaping new mindsets amongst youth and [empowering] them
as citizens to address their countries challenges (Rom, n.d.). Entrepreneurship and
leadership are addressed as part of the solution, but the 400 million African youth
who are disempowered, jobless, and considered a threat to the stability of countries
or a burden to states (Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship, n.d.) can
be best helped, according to Githuku-Shongwe, by creating mindsets that are not
limited by current circumstances, but can re-imagine and re-create new possibilities
(Rom, n.d.). In other words, mindsets that look for solutions both within and outside
of the current system.
The CP games created by Afroes are reflective of this discourse and cover a much
broader range of issues and solutions than those previously examined in this article.
They include issues of gender violence and legal rights; corporate exploitation; democracy, voting, and civic voice; government and corporate corruption; child safety and
abuse; environmental rights; and peace through social justice. Although unemployment and local poverty is one of the main issues the organization hopes to address,
Afroes does not look to entrepreneurship alone as the solution; rather, the organization is focused on empowering youth as citizens who must address their countries
challenges at a range of social, political, and economic levels. In Haki 1: Shield and
Defend, the first game in a series, players are given the opportunity to mend the
wrongs that tear at the social fabric and in the process defend [their] rights by going
on a mission to stop illegal logging in a protected forest in Kenya (Afroes, n.d.). The
game opens with a call to action: Oh the beautiful green forest is being destroyed.
Defend our Haki (Rights). Join the Underground! (Haki 1, 2012). Players get points
for defeating the evil agents who are destroying the forest and are told that, Haki
(Justice) gives you wings (Haki 1, 2012). In the recently released Haki 2: Chaguo
Ni Lako, players join the Underground, a group of heroes who strive for peace and
tranquility as they attempt to stop Mboss, an evil mastermind trying to destabilize
the country by causing discontent, disunity, disharmony and civil unrest (Afroes,
n.d.). In this game, players are asked to be a champion of peace by solving puzzles
and quizzes that hold clues to how they can stop Mboss from reaching his destructive
goals (Afroes, n.d.). The emphasis in the Haki games is on social justice and protecting the rights of people and communities; in this context, Kenya does not need to be
saved by outsiders, rather it needs to be saved by locals from outside forces such as
the Entity, whose corporate practices are responsible for destroying the forest.
The Haki series was designed in partnership with the TUVUKE Peace Initiative,
a countrywide collective platform launched after the violence that erupted during
20072008 to promote peaceful, free, and fair elections in Kenya (Haki Facebook,
n.d.). The Haki games are meant to bolster community involvement in political
processes by inspiring a commitment to peace and tolerance in Kenyan youth. In a
promotional YouTube video for Haki 2, a young man tells potential players to Get
42

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

inspired. Think about your actions. Find out where you stand. Play for peace (Haki 2
Video, 2013). Games like Haki 2 are meant to further TUVUKEs goals of sustainable
peace and inclusive public participation, improve the relationships between land and
natural resource dependent communities, engage youth in civil governance processes
and support safer, peaceful, diversified communities (Tuvuke Initiative, n.d.). In
another game, Moraba, Afroes addresses issues of gender inequality through a focus
on human and legal rights. The questions in this chess/quiz based game focus on
interpersonal power dynamics within individual relationships, the legal structures of
personal rights, and on individual and communal reporting of abuse. While Moraba
fails to bring up gendered power dynamics and biases within the legal system itself,
it does emphasize the rights of men and women equally, rather than focusing on
women only. Unlike the emphasis on market participation seen in the HTSMG,
which also presents issues of gender inequality and gender violence, Moraba takes up
a rights based argument that highlights the social construction of gender and gender
roles and pushes back against them.
The games produced by Afroes operate as CP games in that they are specifically
designed as catalysts for Southern African youth to reimagine and reshape the world
around them as they point to structural inequalities as a root cause of development
issues. The discourse of the organization and the content of the games themselves
take an approach to social change that moves beyond a neoliberal project of market
participation as the solution to development issues, instead focusing on civic participation, institutional change, a critique of current global processes, personal and
communal rights, and peace and social justice. That being said, calling on Kenyans
to fight against issues like illegal logging, or to play for peace, is a more abstract
development approach than presenting specific solutions individuals can take in their
daily lives. CP games play an important role in critiquing asymmetrical power structures and institutional inequality that affect development issues and solutions, but CP
games that propose specific alternatives alongside such a critique may have more viability in development practice. However, it is Afroes mission of reimagining that
has, thus far, set it apart. A small, local organization, it has produced contextually
relevant content that goes beyond mainstream modernization narratives of narrow
economic development and even points to the inequalities exacerbated by such a system. It will be important to pay attention to whether Afroes is able to maintain the
critical approach it has taken within game content as the political economic relationships necessary for it to sustain game production continue to develop. And, more
critically, it is worth asking whether these relationships force Afroes to be complicit in
the continuation of the very transglobal power structures that feed the global inequalities responsible for the issues they are trying to address in the first place.
Conclusion

Regardless of the type of game developed (DD, DI, or CP), each of the organizations
analyzed here discusses the potential of its game to empower players: For the WBI,
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

43

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

empowerment is equivalent to the development of 21st-century skills, specifically
for young people living in Africa; for the HTSM, womens empowerment is related
to financial independence, which game players situated in the Global North can
facilitate through in-game giving; and for Afroes, empowerment necessitates civic
participation, the securing of individual rights, and the ability to imagine and shape
new futures. DDGs, it is clear, are not a revolutionary tool that will necessarily
promote a radically new approach to conceptualizing and enacting development;
rather they reflect the ideology of the organization behind them. In the case of
EVOKE and the HTSMG, that means reinforcing a dominant approach to development that emphasizes capitalist solutions and the broad marketization of all areas
of life. Although the first iteration of EVOKE (for which the WBI spent $622,000
USD to develop and market) broadly missed its target audience, a second version is
in the works and the many resources available to the WBI will, no doubt, allow the
organization to continue to develop and distribute DDGs to enhance 21st-century
skills and affect educational policy across the developing world. The Half the Sky
Movement Media and Technology Engagement Initiative, a recent alliance among
USAID, the Ford Foundation, Show of Force, and Games for Change, and a $1.4
million USAID investment in the HTSMs mobile games makes wider dissemination
of their games an almost certainty. Such support will allow the HTSM to further distribute its WID-based, neoliberal agenda that prioritizes microcredit loans, individual
entrepreneurship, and economic participation by women in a global marketplace.
Games such as these take an uncritical stance in assuming that the processes of
globalization and neoliberalism are not only beneficial for poor, marginalized people across the developing world but also are necessary for development to occur. By
design, DDGs like EVOKE and the HTSMG promote a global capitalist system as a
change agent for eradicating global poverty, while ignoring the role such a system
plays in exacerbating inequality. But their contribution is not only discursive. In cases
like the HTSMG, developed by the largest Canadian-owned game studio, the production of DDGs is directly tied to the growth of the global digital games sector, a highly
concentrated media system in which the Western loci of production, technology, and
skills reinforces established North/South knowledge/power divides.
All that being said, DDGs still hold the potential to be radical players in the development process. The case of Afroes highlights how local organizations can work to
produce relevant content for local audiences and offer up alternatives to established
development narratives. Reflective of their mission to help others reimagine Africa,
Afroes games consider not only solutions to development issues but also their causes
as well. Digital games have shown great possibility for use as educational tools and
their dynamic nature could, theoretically, be used to incorporate a host of participatory feedback loops and user directed narratives that would disrupt current top-down
development constraints. Further, open-world gaming platforms create the potential
for audiences to take control of the game space, presenting opportunities for bringing
players into the construction of development projects in games and beyond (see, for
44

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

example, the UN Habitats Block by Block project). And, of course, the rate of dissemination of mobile phones presents an undeniably broad channel for reaching people,
allowing a level of accessibility unheard of with other ICT-based projects. But, as seen
in the case of Afroes, trying to keep games accessible to a Southern African audience
has meant engaging in a range of partnerships and business strategies that are, or
could become, counterintuitive to what they hope to achieve with their games. While
smaller organizations and independent developers might have the necessary tools to
create DDGs, the cost to distribute them and ensure they reach their target audience
is often prohibitive and might impact their sustainability in the industry.
As the field continues to grow, the great potential of DDGs will necessitate more
studies that ask how games are actually being used, by whom, and to what end. Further
use of the framework presented here, including identifying overlapping categories,
will help generate important micro and macrolevel analysis on the production and
use of DDGs. By situating the analysis of a games productive purpose and political
economic foundations within the framework, broader trends in the DDG field will be
highlighted. As with any technological innovation in the development field, potential
must be understood within the context of actual use. In the case of DDGs, which
operate both as texts that espouse a particular organizations ideology and as political
economic products with implications for local and global development and gaming
industries, actual use is varied and must be analyzed. It is likely, for instance, that some
players of DD and DI games read them critically, while some players of CP games do
not understand messages as intended. Hence, studies to tap how players and others
understand and use DDGs are encouraged.
References
Adhikary, R. W. (2014). Relating development to quality of education: A study on the World
Banks neoliberal policy discourse in education. KEDI Journal of Educational Policy,
11(1), 325.
Afroes. (n.d.). About. Retrieved from http://www.afroes.com/games/
Aguilar, D. D., & Lacsamana, A. E. (2004). Women and globalization. Amherst, NY:
Humanity Books.
Bogost, I. (2006). Videogames and ideological frames. Popular Communication, 4(3),
165183.
Brown, W. (2003). Neo-liberalism and the end of liberal democracy. Theory & Event, 7(1),
143.
Cameron, J. & Haanstra, A. (2008). Development made sexy: How it happened and what it
means. Third World Quarterly, 29(8), 14751489.
Chakravartty, P. (2009). Modernization redux? Cultural studies & development
communication. Television & New Media, 10(1), 3739.
Dingo, R. (2012). Turning the tables on the megarhetoric of womens empowerment. In R.
Dingo & J. B. Scott (Eds.), The megarhetorics of global development (pp. 174198).
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Dyer-Witheford, N., & De Peuter, G. (2009). Games of empire: Global capitalism and video
game. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

45

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

Escobar, A. (1984). Discourse and power in development: Michel Foucault and the relevance
of his work to the Third World. Alternatives: Global, Local, Political, 10(3), 377400.
Fernandez-Vara, C. (2015). Introduction to game analysis. New York, NY: Routledge.
Flanagan, M. (2009). Critical play: Radical game design. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Flanagan, M., & Nissenbaum, H. (2014). Values at play in digital games. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Foss, S. (2009). Rhetorical criticism: Exploration and practice (40 ed.). Long Grove, IL:
Waveland Press.
Frima. (n.d.). Half the Sky Movement: The Game. Retrieved from http://frimastudio.com/
portfolio#/socialwebgames/hakf_the_sky_movement_the_game
Gaible, E., & Dabla, A. (2010). Project evaluation EVOKE. Natoma Group. Prepared for
Robert Hawkins, The World Bank. Retrieved from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
EDUCATION/Resources/ProjectEVOKE-evaluation-final-16oct11.pdf
Gee, J. P. (2005). Good video games and good learning. Phi Kappa Forum, 85(2), 3337.
Githuku-Shongwe, A. (Speaker). (2012, November 20). Mobile games that change culture:
Anne Githuku-Shongwe at TedxSoweto 2012. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=VuL_ANW58Vo
Haki 1: Shield and Defend. (2012). [Mobile game]. Retrieved from http://www.afroes.com/
games/
Haki 2 Video. (2013, February 10). Haki 2 Video. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=1UvkProPh-U
Haki Facebook. (n.d.). About. Retrieved from https://www.facebook.com/pages/AfroesGames/185317804821699
Half the Sky Movement. (n.d.a). About: Movement. Retrieved from http://www.
halftheskymovement.org/pages/movement
Half the Sky Movement. (n.d.b). About. Retrieved from http://www.halftheskymovement.
org/pages/about-half-the-sky-movement
Half the Sky Movement: The Game (2012, January 1). About. Retrieved from https://www.
facebook.com/HalftheGame
Holman, J. (1984). Underdevelopment aid: A critique of the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. Berkeley Journal of Sociology, 29, 119152.
Kabeer, N. (1994). Reversed realities: Gender hierarchies in development thought. London,
England: Verso.
Kapoor, I. (2013). Celebrity humanitarianism: The ideology of global charity. Oxon, England:
Routledge.
Karim, L. (2011). Microfinance and its discontents: Women in debt in Bangladesh.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Klees, S. J. (2012). World Bank and education: Ideological premises and ideological
conclusions. In C. S. Collins & A. W. Wiseman (Eds.), Education strategy in the developing
world: Revising the World Banks education policy (pp. 81109). London, England:
Emerald Group Publishing.
Kwami, J. D., Wolf-Monteiro, B., & Steeves, H. L. (2011). Toward a macro-micro analysis of
gender, power and ICTs: A response to Mickey Lees critique of the human development
approach to new ICTs. International Communication Gazette, 73(6), 539549.
Lerner, D. (1958). The passing of traditional society: Modernizing the Middle East. Glencoe, IL:
Free Press.
46

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

J. Fisher

Games for Africa

Leye, V. (2009). Information and communication technologies for development: A critical
perspective. Global Governance, 15, 2935.
McGonigal, J. (Speaker). (2010, March). Jane McGonigal: Gaming can make a better world
[TED Talk]. Retrieved from http://www.ted.com/talks/jane_mcgonigal_
gaming_can_make_a_better_world.html
Melkote, S. & Steeves, H. L. (2001). Communication for development in the Third World.
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
mLab. (n.d.). mLab Southern Africa. Retrieved from http://www.mlab.co.za/about/
Moser, C. (1989). Gender planning in the Third World: Meeting practical and strategic
gender needs. World Development, 17(11), 17991825.
Nederveen Pieterse, J. (2009). Development theory: Deconstructive/reconstructions. London,
England: SAGE.
Ogan, C., Bashir, M., Camaj, L., Luo, Y., Gaddie, B., Pennington, R., & Salih, M. (2009).
Development communication: The state of research in an era of ICTs and globalization.
International Communication Gazzette, 71(8), 655670.
Parpart, J., Rai, S., & Staudt, K., (Eds.). (2002). Rethinking empowerment: Gender and
development in a global/local world. New York, NY: Routledge.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (n.d.). Our history. Retrieved from http://www.p21.
org/about-us/our-history
Payer, C. (1982). The World Bank: A critical analysis. New York, NY: Monthly Review Press.
Pitman, J. (2011, February 3). Afroes: Anne Githuku-Shongwe. Entrepreneur. Retrieved from
http://www.entrepreneurmag.co.za/advice/success-stories/snapshots/afroes-annegithuku-shongwe/
Rao, L. (1963). Communication and development: A study of two Indian villages. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, St. Paul.
Razavi, S., & Miller, C. (1995). From WID to GAD: Conceptual shifts in the women and
development discourse. Presented to the United Nations Research Institute for Social
Development Programme, Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from http://iupuebla.com/
Doctorado/Docto_Generoyderecho/MA_Doctorado_Genero/MA_from%20wid%20to%
20gad.pdf
Rogers, E. M. (1973). Communication strategies for family planning. New York, NY: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1976). Where are we in understanding the diffusion of innovations?
In W. Schramm & D. Lerner (Eds.), Communication and change (pp. 20422). Honolulu:
University Press of Hawaii.
Rom, F. (n.d.). A new vision for Africas future: Emerging stars. Retrieved from http://www.
emergingstars.com/success-stories/new-vision-africa%E2%80%99s-future
Rughinis, R. (2013). Gamification for productive interaction: Reading and working with the
gamification debate in education. Paper presented at the Information Systems and
Technologies (CISTI) 8th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies
(CISTI), INSPEC Accession Number 13848780 (IEEE Xplore Digital Library, 2013), 2.
Schramm, W. (1964). Mass media and national development. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship. (n.d.). Anne Githuku-Shongwe. Retrieved
from http://www.schwabfound.org/content/anne-githuku-shongwe
Shaffer, D. W. (2004, June). Epistemic frames and islands of expertise: Learning from infusion
experiences. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences
(ICLS), Santa Monica, CA.
Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

47

Games for Africa

J. Fisher

Shome, R., & Hegde, R. S. (2002). Culture, communication, and the challenge of
globalization. Critical Studies in Media Communication, 19(2), 172189.
Singhal, A., & Rogers, E. M. (1999). Entertainment-education: A communication strategy for
social change. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spring, J. (2009). Globalization of education: An introduction. New York, NY: Routledge.
Sydell, L. (2013, November 29). For advocacy groups, video games are the next frontier. NPR.
Retrieved from http://www.npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered/2013/11/29/247515389/
for-advocacy-groups-video-games-are-the-next-frontier
Tarabini, A. (2010). Education and poverty in the global development agenda: Emergence,
evolution and consolidation. International Journal of Educational Development, 30,
204212.
Tuvuke Initiative. (n.d.). Tuvuke Initiative. Retrieved from http://tuvuke.org/pages/Tuvuke_
Initiative.htm
Urgent EVOKE. (2010, January 27). About the EVOKE Game. Retrieved from
http://blog.urgentevoke.net/2010/01/27/about-the-evoke-game/
Wilkins, K. G. (1999). Development discourse on gender and communication in strategies for
social change. Journal of Communication, 49(1), 4668.
Wilkins, K. G. (2000). Redeveloping communication for social change: Theory, practice and
power. Boulder, CO: Rowman and Littlefield.
Wilkins, K. G. (2008). Development communication. In W. Donsbach (Ed.), The international
encyclopedia of communication (pp. 12291238). London, England: Wiley-Blackwell.
Wilkins, K. G., & Enghel, F. (2013). The privatization of development through global
communication industries: Living proof? Media, Culture and Society, 35(2), 165181.
Wilkins, K. G., & Mody, B. (2001). Reshaping development communication: Developing
communication and communicating development. Communication Theory, 11(4),
385396.
World Bank Institute. (n.d.). About WBI. Retrieved from http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/about

48

Communication, Culture & Critique 9 (2016) 3048  2016 International Communication Association

