A Society
of Devices
By Koen Kok and
Steve Widergren

Integrating Intelligent
Distributed Resources
with Transactive Energy

S

Secure, Clean, and Efficient Energy is one
of the great societal challenges of our time. Electricity as a
sustainable energy carrier plays a central role in the most
effective transition scenarios toward sustainability. To harness this potential, the current electricity infrastructure
needs to be rigorously re-engineered into an integrated
and intelligent electricity system: the smart grid. Key elements of the smart grid vision are the coordination mechanisms. In such a system, vast numbers of devices, currently
just passively connected to the grid, will become actively
involved in system-wide and local coordination tasks. In

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MPE.2016.2524962
Date of publication: 19 April 2016

34

ieee power & energy magazine

this light, transactive energy (TE) is emerging as a strong
contender for orchestrating the coordinated operation of so
many devices.
The Gridwise Architecture Council (GWAC) defines TE
as a set of economic and control mechanisms that allows
the dynamic balance of supply and demand across the entire
electrical infrastructure using value as a key operational
parameter. We identify two key parts in this definition.
One is using value as a key operational parameter, which
defines what makes the approach transactive: operational
decisions are made through an exchange of value-based
information captured in transactions between participants.
The other, across the entire electrical infrastructure,
declares this approach feasible across the entire electricity
system, from the transmission level with its bulk generation

1540-7977/162016IEEE

may/june 2016

image licensed by ingram publishing

and transport of electricity down to the distribution system
and the variety of connected customers.
In large parts of the world, electricity markets exist on
the transmission level of the infrastructure. Here, markets
and energy transactions are already used to influence system operation, and, thus, aspects of TE are arguably already
in place at that level. Because of this, the distributed, collaborative decision-making nature of how market mechanisms work at the transmission level in modern power systems is already well understood. The big challenge for the
smart grid is how to coordinate an ever-growing number
of intelligent devices, each with their own objectives and
value perspectives, into a resilient, secure, and efficient
system that balances the trade-offs among the objectives of
the many participants and has the flexibility to evolve with
may/june 2016

the changing mix of resources over time. This frames the
opportunity for introducing TE concepts across the entire
infrastructure and specifically into the distribution-level of
the electricity grid.
This article focuses primarily on the application of TE as
a scalable coordination approach to electricity distribution
systems operations by reviewing and contrasting the way a
TE system works and its advantages with competing control
and coordination approaches. Several field demonstrations
are summarized both in Europe and the United States, where
first-generation TE systems have been shown to improve the
balance between local consumption and production and, by
doing so, improve the integration of renewable generation
and mitigate congestion (i.e., local power flow overloads) in
distribution systems.
ieee power & energy magazine

35

Classifying Distribution-Level Energy
Management Approaches

Top-Down Switching

In a distribution-level TE system, mid- to small-sized electricity consuming or producing devices automatically negotiate
about their actions with each other, with devices in the physical network, and with dispatch systems of energy suppliers
through efficient and scalable electronic market algorithms.
To debate the advantages of this approach, and to classify
different approaches, the smart energy management matrix
has been introduced. This matrix classifies smart grid energy
management approaches into four main categories. The vertical matrix axis distinguishes if an approach makes decisions
on local issues either locally or centrally. The horizontal axis
plots whether the approach uses one-or two-way communications. Figure 1 shows this matrix with four general classes of
energy management approaches filled in: top-down switching, price reaction, centralized optimization, and transactive
control and coordination.

This quadrant contains the classical demand-response
programs where, typically in a certain grid area, one
device group is switched simultaneously following a
broadcasted signal. This is the simplest demand-response
approach, and it has been used successfully for decades in
different parts of the world. In the typical setup, a signal
sent out through the power grid by the local utility company switches off systems such as water heaters, and airconditioning systems during peak load periods. Although
the approach is simple and effective, it does not unlock
the full response potential of devices, as the device state
is not taken into account. The expected system reaction is only known by using statistics, and as a result the
operation is based on worst-case scenarios. Most of all,
the method ignores the consumer altogether. It does not
take user preferences into account and interferes with the
autonomy of energy consumers.

Centralized Optimization
Classifying Distribution-Level Energy Management Approaches
Decisions
on Local
Issues
Made
Locally

Price
Reaction

Decisions
on Local
Issues
Made
Centrally

Transactive
Control

Top-Down
Switching

Centralized
Optimization

One-Way
Communications

Two-Way
Communications
(a)

Decisions
on Local
Issues
Made
Locally
Decisions
on Local
Issues
Made
Centrally

Price Reaction
+ Full Use of Response Potential
 Uncertain System Reaction
 Market Inefficiency
+ No Privacy Issues

Transactive Control
+ Full Use of Response Potential
+ Certain System Reaction
+ Efficiency Market
+ No Privacy Issues

Top-Down Switching
 Partial Use or Response Potential
 Uncertain System Reaction
 Autonomy Issues

Centralized Optimization
+ Full Use of Response Potential
+ Certain System Reaction
 Privacy and Autonomy Issues
 Low Scalability

One-Way
Communications

(b)

Two-Way
Communications

figure 1. The energy management matrix: the four main categories of (a) smart grid
energy management and (b) their pros and cons.
36

ieee power & energy magazine

In the centralized optimization
quadrant, local decisions are still
made centrally, but communications are two way. Here, a complex optimization engine oversees
all flexible demand and supply
in the smart grid cluster under
consideration (such as a virtual
power plant or a local grid segment). Based on available information and taking into account
the global and, perhaps, local control goals, the optimizer searches
for the best solution for the whole
system. All relevant local data
need to be communicated to the
optimizer, which informs the central controller that communicates
control signals or schedules to
the field.
Having the relevant local data
available as input to the optimization, the method is able to fully
unlock the response potential of
the individual devices. Further,
as the central system performs
a direct control on the local
devices, the system-level reaction
of the response cluster is known
when a response is triggered. The
autonomy issue of the top-down
switching approach remains, and
a privacy issue is added as detailed
local information is now communicated. Further, c ommunicating
may/june 2016

Successful outcomes require acceptance by business and
policy decision makers as a cost-effective, valid, equitable, and
advantageous revenue/investment recovery mechanism.

all relevant local information to a central point limits the accuracy and scalability properties of the approach. When equipment changes locally, the central system must be updated as
well. If the number of responsive houses, buildings, and installations becomes large, the communication and optimization
times grow nonlinearly. The approach also does not respond
gracefully to communications or central optimizer failures.

Price-Reactive Systems
The price reaction approach is based on a one-way signaling of a dynamic price to end users. At certain time intervals, a new electricity price or a price profile for the coming hours is sent to an automation system at the premises.
This price profile is displayed for the end user or automation system to adjust equipment operations. Benefits of
this approach include 1) simple one-way communications
leading to low system complexity, 2) no issues regarding privacy or autonomy, and 3) an easily implementable
approach in regions having an electricity wholesale market
due to the availability of a day-ahead or intraday price profile from this market.
Using the price signal, the operation of responsive devices
can be optimized economically by a local intelligent controller that is owned by and/or under the control of the consumer.
Such a controller would thus be able to increase the consumers loads during low-priced periods, and generation during
high-priced periods, while taking the device states and user
preferences into account. The controller has the opportunity
to unleash the full response potential. To bill the customer
according to the prices signaled, a c ommunicating electricity meter needs to measure usage at a resolution appropriate
to track response from the price signal. The recent technology developments in advanced metering are providing solutions to mitigate the privacy risks.
These characteristics have advantages compared to
the central optimization case; however, the reaction of a
demand-response pool to each price reaction signal is difficult to predict without knowing each devices state and end
users preferences.

Transactive Control
and Coordination
The transactive control quadrant offers distinct advantages
in integrating flexible devices in the electricity operations.
Here, smart homes, buildings, and industrial sites engage
in automated market trade with others at the distribution
may/june 2016

system level and with representation of the bulk system.
Communications are based on prices and energy quantities
in a two-way negotiation.
Analogous to the price reaction approach, the operation of the flexible devices is optimized economically by
a local intelligent controller (or agent) under the control
of the end user. This controller receives price information and takes the device state and user preferences into
account to operate local demand and supply resources.
This is the same as the price reaction approach except
that, before the price reaction takes place, the local controller communicates the available flexibility combined
with their preferences and conditions to an electronic marketplace through a market transaction (price/quantity bid).
Consuming devices communicate their willingness to pay,
while producing devices communicate the price for which
they are willing to produce.
Since all resources participating in the market communicate their intended reaction to a range of price levels, the
pool reaction to a range of price signals is known up front
and the market mechanism can determine the price for an
appropriate balance of supply and demand. From the end
users or energy consumers point of view, the local energy
management system agent acts on behalf of the user or
consumer to bid into the market and reacts to the resulting
market price signals. Unlike the centralized optimization
approach, no direct outside control is involved here. However, from a system perspective, the participants engage in
coordinated control actions. With this approach, demand
response moves from influencing, with an uncertain overall response, into market-based control with a collaboratively derived dynamic price as a control signal to trigger
a predictable system reaction. This is why this approach is
sometimes referred to as market-based control or transactive control multiagent system (see Distributed Intelligence
and Multiagent Systems).
When properly implemented, the market bids sent by the
end users energy management systems can be aggregated
together. When this is done for two devices, the resulting
bid represents the preferences of the two devices together.
The message size of the aggregated bid curve is a simple
combination of the individual device bid curves. Using this
property, a highly scalable system can be obtained when,
in a response cluster, bids are aggregated together. The
processing and communication time then scales with the
height of the aggregation tree instead of with the number
ieee power & energy magazine

37

Distributed Intelligence
and Multiagent Systems
The study of market-based approaches as a distributed intelligence mechanism for solving multiobjective optimization problems have their roots in economic theory. With
the advent of information and communications technology and the growth of robotics and intelligent systems,
their application to solve complex systems of systems
problems is expanding. The increasing pervasiveness of
computational resources in devices enables local intelligence, and their communications connectivity allows
them to interact. This interaction of intelligent devices is
foundational to the discipline of multiagent systems and
the methods and tools that support them.
For the purposes of this article, devices or systems are
intelligent if they are able to perceive their surroundings
to gather information about the context of their operation.
Like people, they can reason autonomously by processing information in a goal-directed way to forecast, plan,
and act. Distributed multiagent systems are characterized
by a population of intelligent devices that communicate
with each other to exchange information (measured or
derived) to better accomplish their independent objectives through cooperation and joint action. Multiagent
systems are constrained by their environment, which imposes physical, temporal, and policy (economic or other)
conditions on their interaction. In this regard, intelligent
agents reside in an ecosystem of products, services, deployment platforms, and other supporting infrastructure.
Like societies of people, they interact with more or less
independent decision-making authority within cultural
and governing policy structures. As their intelligence is
captured in cyber-based programs, multiagent systems
can reside in the real world or run in a simulated cyberworld. This is particularly important for complex systems
design and testing, and simulation.

of devices participating. Further, the approach protects the
end users privacy as the bids communicate only information about energy quantities and prices. When these bids are
aggregated on the level of a house, a building, or an industrial site before being communicated externally, the information exchanged is comparable to that of a metering system collecting near-real-time data as described for the price
reaction approach above. And unlike the centralized optimization approach, no complicated models of the devices,
consumer behavior, or preferences are exchanged or maintained. In summary, TE approaches are able to access the
full response potential of flexible devices, provide greater
38

ieee power & energy magazine

certainty about the momentary system reaction, realize an
efficient market with proper incentives, and protect the privacy of the end user whose devices participate in the energy
management task.

TE Systems Implementations
In terms of customer privacy, scalability, and efficiency, TE
systems have clear advantages over more common smart
grid coordination, such as price reactive systems and centralized optimization. Both in the United States and Europe, TE
research has had a strong focus on intelligent agent-based innovation in household equipment and field demonstrations involving grid operators, energy supply companies, power technology
companies, and regulators.

TE Systems Implementations
in the United States
The U.S. Department of Energy partnered with several organizations in three major demonstration projects using TE
mechanisms to coordinate distributed energy resources with
system operations.

Olympic Peninsula Demonstration, 20062007
This first proof-of-concept TE project was located in an
area of the Olympic Peninsula of Washington state, which
receives electricity through a radial transmission connection to the Pacific Northwest power grid. The project tested
the potential for flexibility offered in coordinating distributed energy resources to postpone or remove the need for
a transmission upgrade. The project used a 5-min doubleauction market technique to coordinate four large municipal
water pumps, two backup diesel generators, and residential
demand response from electric water and space heating systems in 112 homes. The project established the viability of
TE to achieve multiple objectives: system peak load and distribution constraint management; wholesale price purchases
by the utility; and residential, commercial, and municipal
energy cost savings.
The market received supply bids from the utility based
upon a markup of the wholesale price of energy in the area.
The diesel generators bid was based on the actual fixed and
variable costs incurred for operation. The pumps bid into
the market was based on water-reservoir levels that they were
designed to regulate. And the residential demand-response
equipment allowed the households to specify their automatic
price-response preferences. To capture their preferences, a
list of comfort settings named to indicate ranges between
most comfortable (nonprice responsive) to greatest economy
(highly price responsive). The 5-min market determined the
clearing price for energy and broadcast that to the market
participants. Each participants bidding equipment would
operate based on whether their bid was higher or lower than
the market-clearing price.
Figure 2 is the operational dashboard for the demonstration. Besides coordinating the price-responsive resources
may/june 2016

figure 2. The Olympic Peninsula dashboard summary.

to wholesale price fluctuations, the transactive system also
managed congestion on a distribution circuit, by managing
all of the devices as if they were on one circuit and seasonally adjusting the capacity setting of that circuit to exercise
constrained operating conditions. The project controlled the
imported capacity of the circuit below the constraint for all
but one 5-min interval over the entire project year.

AEP Ohio gridSMART Real-Time Pricing
Demonstration, 20102014
Building upon the Olympic Peninsula project, the AEP
Ohio gridSMART (gridSMART is a registered trademark
of AEP Ohio) demonstration project had a real-time pricing
(RTP) component, called SMART Choice (SMART Choice
is a registered trademark of AEP Ohio), that used a 5-min
double-auction market to dispatch participating responsive
loads on each of four distribution circuits. The preferences of
household occupants were reflected in software agents that
developed an overall price flexibility curve for the household
and coordinated device control actions [in this case heating,
may/june 2016

ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) units] with the
market system. A market clearing engine at the operations
center aggregated the bids from all households to form a
price-sensitive demand curve for the distribution circuit and
calculated a clearing price and a supply bid, which incorporated the regional market operators (PJM) 5-min wholesale
locational marginal price for electricity. The clearing price
was broadcast back to the households and captured in the
billing system according to a tariff approved by the regulator,
the Public Utility Commission of Ohio. An overview of the
RTP system design is presented in Figure 3.
The RTP experiments ran over the late spring and summer
of 2013 and involved four feeders with approximately 200
households actively participating. Figure 4 shows this transactive system in action on a hot summer day. As expected,
the short-term energy use was negatively correlated with the
electricity price. In addition, many experiments were held to
determine the HVAC resources response to peak-shaving
conditions by temporarily lowering the circuit capacity limits on the c ircuits. Under this situation, the billing system
ieee power & energy magazine

39

Wholesale Market
5-min Modal Energy Prices
Service
Provider
Operations
Bids
Clearing
Price

Usage

Meter

Supply Usage
Information

Home
Residential
Energy
Management
System

Bids

Dispatch
System

Clearing Price

Consumer
Display
Monthly Bill

~200
Homes
on Four
Feeders

Operations Center

Programmable
Thermostat

Field

figure 3. A design overview of the AEP Ohio gridSMART RTP system.

rebates a household for the difference between the congested
clearing price and the normal 5-min real-time price and
provides an incentive payment to a household if its bid was
above the normal clearing price but below the congestion

MW

10
8
6
4
2
0
150

clearing price. An analysis of the
field results indicated that wholesale purchases and household bills
reduced by about 5% each.
The field data was also used
to calibrate simulated household demand-response models
for investigating higher penetration levels participants. Figure 5
plots the expected response to
congestion events on a feeder
with 100% RTP household penetration. The dotted line represents a simulation without RTP
response and the remaining lines
show responses and the rebound
for one-, two-, four-, and six-hour
congestion events that represent
the maximum response using the
diversity of thermostat settings
seen in the field.

Pacific Northwest Smart Grid
Demonstration, 20102015
The Pacific Northwest Smart Grid Demonstration
(PNWSGD) included multiple states and cooperation from

Feeder 180 Power
Feeder-Rated Capacity
Feeder Limit
Feeder Power

Reduce Feeder
Capacity to
Engage End Use

HVAC Load
Oversatisfied
Inactive
Must Run
Active

100
Devices
Respond to
Price
Fluctuations
US$/MWh

50
04 05 06

HVAC Units
Drop Off

RTP PJM Price
Constrained Price
Price Volatility

500

Units Rebound
When Capacity
Returns to
Normal

12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Hour
Feeder 180 Price
18 July 2013 20:30

0
3
Average Indoor
Temperature Rises
~4 F Over
Four Hours

0

80
78
76
74
72

04 05

Price Rises to
Price Cap

12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Hour
House Temperatures, Feeder 180
18 July 2013 20:30
Observed Average Temperature
Temperature Average Deviation

5
0

04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21

F

F

3

5

figure 4. The AEP Ohio gridSMART RTP transactive system in action.
40

ieee power & energy magazine

may/june 2016

Demand (kW)

multiple electric utilities, includ3.50
ing rural electric co-ops and
investor-owned, municipal, and
other public utilities, as indicated
3.00
in Figure 6. There were 55 unique
instantiations of distinct smart grid
2.50
systems demonstrated at the project sites. The local objectives for
2.00
these systems included improved
Control
reliability, energy conservation,
One-Hour Event
Four-Hour Event
1.50
improved efficiency, and demand
Two-Hour Event
Six-Hour Event
One-Hour CPP
responsiveness. The demonstraTwo-Hour CPP
Four-Hour CPP
Six-Hour CPP
tion deployed a transactive sys1.00
14:00 15:00 16:00 17:00 18:00 19:00 20:00 21:00 22:00 23:00
tem to coordinate the operation
17 July 2013
of distributed energy resources
and addressed regional objectives,
including the mitigation of renew- figure 5. A Simulated response to congestion events calibrated from gridSMART field data.
able energy intermittency and the
flattening of system load. The
Figure 7 provides a high-level summary of the transactransactive system coordinated a regional response across
11 utilities and showed that distributed assets can respond tive-node approach developed for this project. Each node
dynamically on a wide scale.
represents one or more electrically connected resources.

BC Hydro
WA

U. Washington
Grand
(Customer)
Coulee
*Seattle (and SCL)
Peninsula Light
(COOP)
Ellensburg
*Fox Island
(MUNI)

MT

Flathead
Electric
(COOP)
*Kalispell

Island Power
(COOP)
*Spokane

Hot Springs
Taft

Hydro Power
Wind Power
Carbon Power
Nuclear Power

Avista
*Pullman (and WSU)

Benton (PUD) L. Granite
Hanford
Little Goose
Kennewick
L. Monumental
Ice Harbor
Bonneville
Milton-Freewater
(MUNI)
McNary
Bonneville Power *Portland
John Day
State Line
Administration (BPA)
Bonneville

Portland General Electric
*Salem

Key
Subprojects

Garrison

North Western
Energy
*Helena
To Colstrip
Townsend

Idaho Power
Lower Valley
Power (COOP)
Idaho Falls
Power

*Jackson
Palisades
PacifiCorp

Borah
ID

OR
COB

WY

NOB (DC Intertie)

figure 6. The PNWSGD geographical region, including participants and major generation and transmission.
may/june 2016

ieee power & energy magazine

41

Inf
lue

nc

e

Input
Incentive
or Price

Control
Signals for
Nodes Assets

Transactive Node
 Aggregate Incentive or Quantity Estimate Inputs
from Multiple Nodes
 Calculate Output Incentive and Load Estimate
for Adjacent Nodes
 Implement Local Control of Assets at the Node

G
lob

Local
Data and Info

al

Output
Quantity

Output
Incentive
or Price
Input
Quantity
(a)

(b)

figure 7. The PNWSGD transactive node communicating with electrical neighboring nodes.

Nodes interact with electrically connected neighboring
nodes to exchange information about the quantity of energy
estimated to be produced or consumed and the cost of that
energy. A time series of information is exchanged so that the
nodes negotiate operation not only in the next interval but
optimize their operation over the time horizon of the time
series. Internally, the node manages the resources under
its purview to see that their needs and flexibility are properly reflected in the negotiation. The system of nodes iterates exchanging information for each operations time step
until the difference in incentive price and energy exchange
between each neighbor converges.
The transactive system revealed a continuum of incentives to the utilities and asset systems and engaged assets
dynamically according the each assets capabilities and
the flexibility of the assets owner. In addition, the project
used a simulation model of the regional system to assess the
impact of a scaled-up deployment of the transactive system.
This simulation showed that the regions peak load might
be reduced by about 8% if 30% of the regions loads were
responding to the transactive system.

TE Systems Implementations in Europe
The major European TE-based coordination mechanism,
PowerMatcher, has been installed in approximately 1,000
households and industrial sites to integrate numerous small
electricity-consuming and -producing devices in the operation of the electricity infrastructure. Since its incarnation in
2004, the PowerMatcher has been implemented in five major
software versions. In a spiral approach, each version was
implemented almost from scratch and tested in simulations
and field experiments. The first three versions were research
42

ieee power & energy magazine

implementations written in the C# programming language.
The second Java version, PowerMatcher 2.0, is industrialstrength software and is open source available through the
Flexiblepower Alliance Network (FAN).
PowerMatcher puts the end customer in a central position in the smart grid. It is the end customer who owns the
domestic appliance, electrical car, and/or industrial installation that is potentially able to offer the operational flexibility
needed for a smart and sustainable electricity grid. PowerMatcher empowers the end customer to sell this flexibility to
the parties interested. This selling is completely automatic
using a piece of intelligent software installed at the premises
of, and running under the authority of, this end customer.
This so-called intelligent agent trades on behalf of the end
customer. For this trading activity on behalf of the device
owner, the uniformed data messages exchanged are stripped
of specific local information. Only aggregated information
regarding power levels and prices is exchanged, protecting
the privacy of the customer.
With the European electricity sector highly unbundled
into a market subsystem trading the electricity commodity
and a network subsystem dealing with operation of the physical transmission and distribution networks, the two main
application fields of the PowerMatcher technology are found
in market operations and in active distribution network management. As the operations of these two subsystems are
highly separated in Europe, PowerMatcher approaches these
as two separate control objectives. The intelligence at the
level of the customer premises, regardless of whether it is a
household, business, or industry, delivers the available flexibility as a service to both sides. This leads to the multigoal
optimization model depicted in Figure 8.
may/june 2016

TE systems have clear advantages over more common
smart grid coordination, such as price reactive systems
and centralized optimization.

PowerMatcher Field Experiences
An overview of accomplishments in field trials can be found
in Table 1.

Couperus Smart Grid, 20112015
The Couperus building in the large The Hague suburb of
Ypenburg, The Netherlands, includes an apartment tower of
more than 70 m (Figure 9). Each of the approximately 300
apartments in the tower has an individual heat pump feeding
low-temperature floor heating and a heat storage tank containing hot tap water. The Couperus smart grid project tested the
ability of these heat pumps to 1) integrate wind energy through
imbalance reduction and 2) capacity management (peak shaving) on the local low-to-medium voltage substation. In the
first case, the heat pumps reacted, through the use of Power-

Matchers electronic market, to the unexpected over- or underproduction of a nearby wind farm. The so-called imbalance of
the wind farm, i.e., the difference between its day-ahead forecast and the actual production, was used as a real-time control
objective. In the European electricity wholesale markets, these
imbalances generally lead to less revenue for the wind farm
owner. Thus, reducing imbalance creates value for renewable
generators. Simultaneously, the heat pump flexibility was used
for congestion management in the local distribution grid.
Each heat pump is represented by an intelligent control
agent that delivers the pumps operational flexibility to the
electronic market under the condition that it controls the
apartments inner temperature within a temperature band of
0.8 C around the user set point. In this way, the comfort of
the residents is always the first priority: if a resident wants a

figure 8. Orthogonal multiobjective optimization using transactional control and coordination. The intelligent system at
the customers premises delivers the available flexibility in two directions.
may/june 2016

ieee power & energy magazine

43

table 1. A summary of field validation results for the PowerMatcher.
Project/Demo

Description

Results

Year

Crisp field experiment

Flexibility sourced from industrial and
household sites reacting to fluctuations
in wind energy generation.

Electricity market related gain: wind
imbalance reduction of 40%.

20052006

Microcogeneration
field experiment

Flexibility from microcogeneration units
at households used to perform peakload reduction in a distribution grid.

Distribution grid peak-load-reduction
of 30% (during summer) to 50% (during
winter).

20062007

PowerMatching City

Demonstration of simultaneous
optimization for energy trade and active
distribution management. It included a
value assessment of end user flexibility.

Based on the demos outcomes, the value
of end user flexibility in The Netherlands
may reach an estimated 3.5 billion
(US$2.8 billion). The Netherlands has a
population of 17 million people.

20092015

Smart-charging
electrical vehicles
(EVs)

A series of tests with smart-charging
EVs coordinated using PowerMatcher,
backed by large-scale simulation study
(Grid4Vehicles project).

Active network management: distribution
grid peak-load-reductions of 3035%.

First EV test:
about 2007;
Grid4Vehicles
simulation:
2010

SmartHouse/
SmartGrid scalability
field experiment

Scalability stress test of large-scale
information communications technology
(ICT) architecture connected to a cluster
of real households.

Scalability beyond 1 million customers is
feasible.

2010

EcoGrid EU
demonstration

Large-scale demonstration of a novel
real-time market involving 5-min
electricity prices communicated to
about 1,800 households, of which
a subset ran PowerMatchers ICT
architecture.

Large-scale roll-out experience for
price-based and transactive smart grid
technologies. Unleashed flexibility from a
large number of heat pumps, making 20%
of their power consumption shiftable in
time.

20112015

Couperus

Approximately 300 apartments
with heat pumps (HPs) involved
in simultaneous optimization for
energy trade and active distribution
management.

Electricity market related gain: wind
imbalance reduction of 80%.
Active network management: proof
of principle of locational-price based
congestion management. Operation of
HPs shiftable up to eight hours.

20112015

temperature of 19, then his/her heat pumps agent will keep
the temperature between 18.6 and 19.4 C. A temperature
variation in such a narrow bandwidth is not noticed by the

resident, while it allows the agent to postpone activation of a
heat pump by six to eight hours.
During the demonstration, the wind imbalance was
reduced by more than 80%. At the same time the system
showed it was capable of performing locational-price based
congestion management in the local distribution grid.

Lessons Learned

figure 9. The Couperus building in The Hague, The Netherlands, was used as a TE test site. (Photo courtesy of Van
Dongen-Koschuch Architects and Planners.)
44

ieee power & energy magazine

The analysis results from these demonstrations indicate that
independent decision making based on a frequently updated
market-based signal can regulate the overall feeder load for
economic and reliability benefits. Automation with simple
user interfaces and program design is important to make this
work. The technology must also be inexpensive and simple
to install and maintain. The costs of deploying specialized
communications and automation that can host the intelligent
agents will likely lead to deployment approaches that incorporate these technologies for additional purposes (such as
general building automation, premises security, or healthmonitoring systems).
may/june 2016

Independent decision making based on a frequently updated
market-based signal can regulate the overall feeder load for
economic and reliability benefits.
In all of the demonstrations, it would have been interesting to collect and analyze further data. For example, to
analyze household learning patterns and thermostat interactions, a demonstration program needs to operate over a long
period (perhaps two years). This would also allow for analysis of seasonal variations. In addition, a greater population of
responsive resources on the same feeder could provide direct
measurement of the ability of a portfolio of resources to regulate feeder power levels for peak shaving and other benefits.
Lastly, additional sensing of equipment operation could corroborate the derived information deduced by statistical analysis of metered data and better inform simulation models.
The demonstrations only begin to address some of the
many questions about such a transactive system. Due to the
complex nature of interactions between consumers, smart
equipment, and the electricity system, as well as the changing demands due to weather and time of day, week, and year,
characterizing the amount of flexibility in the distribution
system and the elasticity of demand-side resources to price
is very difficult. The field data begins to provide insights, but
predictive modeling and bell-weather metrics remain immature. More work is needed to develop a theoretical basis for
analyzing these complex systems and testing designs for performance and stability prior to deployments.

Conclusions and Future Directions
The potential benefits from harnessing the flexibility in the
operation of distributed energy resources to help meet an
evolving set of requirements for safe, efficient, reliable, and
resilient energy systems grows daily. TE concepts embrace
the complex system of systems nature of electric power
systems to present practical, scalable ways to integrate the
assets of many self-directed participants working toward a
mixed set of individual and shared objectives. Characteristics of any reasonable solution need to address the following
important concerns:
 mitigate privacy, free will, and cybersecurity issues
 define a simple cyberinteraction paradigm, applicable
at all levels of the system and supported by standards
 offer viable transition paths that coexist with traditional approaches
 provide smooth, stable, predictable operation and
graceful degraded performance when stressed.
A transition to TE at the distribution level of the system challenges the status quo. Successful outcomes require
acceptance by business and policy decision makers as a
cost-effective, valid, equitable, and advantageous revenue/
may/june 2016

investment recovery mechanism. In addition, a vibrant vendor community (or technology ecosystem) must emerge to
supply a healthy variety of transactional products and services, such as operating platforms that support the integration of a heterogeneous mix of equipment, as well as the
associated system and device-level automation needed to
negotiate, operate to expectations, and reconcile agreedupon transactions.
Work is underway to socialize TE concepts through the
GWAC in North America and FAN in Europe, while FAN is
also advancing TE framework standards and the Smart Grid
Interoperability Panel is facilitating the extension of existing
standards and development of new interface standards.

For Further Reading
GridWise Transactive Energy Framework. (2015, Jan.). [Online]. Available: http://www.gridwiseac.org/about/transactive_
energy.aspx
Olympic Peninsula: Pacific Northwest GridWise Testbed
Demonstration Projects: Part I report (PNNL-17167). (2007,
Oct.). [Online]. Available: http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/
tesfatsi/OlympicPeninsulaProject.FinalReport_pnnl17167.pdf
AEP Ohio gridSMART Demonstration Project Final
Technical Report. (2014, June). [Online]. Available: https://
www.smartgrid.gov/project/aep_ohio_gridsmartsm_
demonstration_project
Pacific Northwest Smart Grid Demonstration Project
Technology Performance Report. (2015, June). [Online].
Available: https://www.smartgrid.gov/document/Pacific_
Northwest_Smart_Grid_Technology_Performance.html
PowerMatcher and FAN Alliance websites. (2016). [Online]. Available: www.PowerMatcher.net, www.flexible
power.org
K. Kok. (2013, July). The PowerMatcher: Smart Coordination for the Smart Electricity Grid Book. [Online]. Available: www.tinyurl.com/PowerMatcherBook
O. Pruissen, et al., Simultaneous imbalance reduction
and peak shaving using field operational VPP with heat
pumps, in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. on Electricity Distribution
CIRED, 2015.

Biographies
Koen Kok is with The Netherlands Organization for Applied
Scientific Research and the Technical University of Denmark, Roskilde.
Steve Widergren is with Pacific Northwest National Labp&e
oratory, Richland, Washington.
ieee power & energy magazine

45

