See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267151803

Beyond Simulations: Serious Games for Training Interpersonal Skills in Law
Enforcement
Conference Paper  September 2014
DOI: 10.13140/2.1.4209.9201

CITATIONS

READS

9

166

4 authors:
Jeroen M. Linssen

Mariet Theune

Saxion University of Applied Sciences

University of Twente

26 PUBLICATIONS 135 CITATIONS

169 PUBLICATIONS 1,974 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Merijn Bruijnes

Thomas De Groot

Delft University of Technology

University of Twente

29 PUBLICATIONS 185 CITATIONS

14 PUBLICATIONS 35 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

H2020: Council of Coaches View project

Tasty Bits and Bytes View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Jeroen M. Linssen on 21 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Beyond Simulations: Serious Games for Training
Interpersonal Skills in Law Enforcement
Jeroen Linssen, Mariet Theune
and Merijn Bruijnes
Department of Human Media Interaction
University of Twente
Enschede, The Netherlands
Email: j.m.linssen@utwente.nl

AbstractSerious games can be used to improve peoples social
awareness by letting them experience difficult social situations
and learn from these experiences. However, we assert that,
when moving beyond the strict realism that social simulations
offer, techniques from role play may be used that offer more
possibilities for feedback and reflection. We discuss the design
of two such serious games for interpersonal skills training in
the domain of law enforcement. These games feature intelligent
virtual agents with which trainees have to interact across different
scenarios to improve their social awareness. By interacting with
the virtual agents, trainees experience how their behaviour
influences the course of the intervention and its outcomes. We
discuss how we intend to improve the learning experience in these
serious games by including meta-techniques from role play. We
close by describing the current and future implementations of
our serious games.
Index TermsSocial simulation, serious games, role playing
games, meta-techniques.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In both interviews and street interventions, police officers
strive to get witnesses, suspects and civilians to cooperate.
Regrettably, people are not always open to this. Therefore,
police officers are taught how to get them to assume a more
receptive stance. Our long-term goal is the development of
serious game prototypes in collaboration with the Dutch police
so that these games assist in the training curriculum of police
trainees by letting them practice with such interactions. The
first of these is POINTER (POlice INTERview game), in which
trainees train their interviewing skills with crime suspects;
the second is LOITER (LOItering Teenagers, an Emergent
Role-play), which lets trainees enact street interventions with
loitering juveniles.
In this paper, we describe the status quo of our research
efforts toward these serious games. Of prime importance to
the attainment of social awareness is insight into the thought
processes that drive people. Therefore, we are building a
cognitive model based on a corpus of police interviews to
determine the factors underlying peoples behaviour (described
in Section III). We use this model to inform the behaviour of
the virtual agents that enact the roles of suspects and juveniles
in our games. In Section IV, we discuss the relations between
social simulations and serious games. We explain how we

Thomas de Groot
T-Xchange
Enschede, The Netherlands
Email: thomas.degroot@txchange.nl

sacrifice the realism usually found in social simulations in the
design of POINTER and LOITER to provide more explicit
feedback and moments of reflection. We elaborate on the
work involved in implementing these games in more detail in
Section V. We wrap up by discussing future research directions
in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
There are several research projects in which social interaction between human and virtual agents has been researched
for educational purposes and serious games. The negotiation
training systems of [1] revolve around US military training
for peace missions in the Middle-East. Their Stability and
Support Operations system features extensive modelling of the
emotions of virtual characters, letting them appraise and cope
with user actions. An application called FearNot! was designed
as a virtual drama for anti-bullying education [2]. This system
is also based on virtual characters that can appraise and cope
with user actions, but adopts an unscripted emergent narrative
approach to let users have freedom of choice. Focusing on bad
news conversations between employees and managers, the
serious game deLearyous models the interpersonal relations
between the two interaction parties [3]. In deLearyous, virtual
characters base their behaviour on their attitude towards the
user. As a result, users (the managers) are required to learn
how to behave to not let the virtual employees erupt in tears or
anger. JUST-TALK is a prototype training application designed
to help police officers interact with mentally ill people [4].
As in the previous systems, the focus of JUST-TALK is on
the realism of the simulation. Unlike our games, the above
systems do not directly address the importance of feedback
and moments of reflection to stimulate learning.
III. T OWARDS A C OGNITIVE M ODEL FOR S OCIAL
I NTERACTION
We strive to use theories and concepts from social psychology to inform the behaviour of our agents in order to create a
cognitive model that is both believable and explainable. Using
a data-driven approach, we have investigated which theories
and concepts are relevant to describe the interaction in a police
interview [5]. Using an annotated corpus of enacted police

interviews (from actual police training) we were able to link
theories and concepts to the observed interactions. We found
that we could describe the majority of the interactions between
police officers and suspects in concepts from three theories,
namely those of interpersonal stance, face, and rapport [6]
[8]. The theory of interpersonal stance describes how people
assume a certain stance toward the other when they interact.
Leary uses the orthogonal dimensions of dominance and
togetherness to explain how different combinations of these
dimensions lead to stances and how people are influenced by
stances of others [6]. The notion of face boils down to the
needs for approval and autonomy a person has. For example,
when a suspect is questioned about his whereabouts on a
particular day, this may be unwelcome to the suspect, because
he feels that his freedom is being restricted by the police
officer [7]. Rapport revolves around the bond two people share:
when they are attentive and coordinated to each other, they
will feel as if they are in sync [8]. To be able to describe
all interactions in the corpus, we used the meta-concepts of
information and strategy to cover actions related to lying or
withholding information, and using explicit strategies.
Currently, we are building and evaluating a computational
model that relates the mentioned theories to each other.
We carried out an evaluation experiment in which we let
participants interact with our model in an abstract way. We
explained that they would interact with one of three virtual
suspect personas of which we gave descriptions, and that their
goal was to discover which of the three suspects communicated
with them. They were able to interact with a virtual suspect in
a turn-based fashion. First, participants indicated what kind
of utterance they wished to perform by setting parameters
related to the theories such as stance, rapport, and type of
question. Then, we let the model interpret this combination of
parameters by calculating how that utterance would influence
the mental state of the persona. This persona subsequently
responded with a set of parameters at the same level of abstraction as the input of the participants. Then, the participants had
to interpret these parameters and create a new utterance based
on this interpretation. This continued until the participants
wished to guess which persona they were interacting with.
Preliminary results indicate that the majority of participants
correctly determined their interaction partners.
IV. D ESIGN P OSSIBILITIES FOR S ERIOUS G AMES
Social simulations try to offer strict representations of
situations they are intended to model. In their current training
curriculum, police trainees practice with professional actors
to simulate and experience possible scenarios. We regard such
simulations as a form of role play and see several possibilities
for the design of serious games based on role playing games.
We believe that the design of serious games only depends to
certain degree on the domain for which they are intended. The
learning goals are the most important factor when designing
serious games and must first be determined. In our case,
the overarching learning goal is that police officers should
have social awareness: they should be able to explain how

their behaviour influences that of others and vice versa. The
computational model we described in the previous section
should help trainees understand why people behave as they do.
It is through our serious games that trainees then learn how this
model functions. Ultimately, in order to secure and strengthen
the knowledge they have gained from an experience with a
simulation or a game, it is vital that trainees reflect on their
behaviour [9]. Of course, experiential learning can be achieved
in simulations, yet simulations by themselves lack methods
for explicit feedback and reflection. Police officers in training
already use after-action-reviews to discuss how interactions
played out, but for our serious game we plan to take the idea
of role play a step further.
A. Beyond Simulation, Towards Learning
We assert that the extent to which a serious game reflects
the situations from the domain can be varied. In other words,
the realisation of the role play can be more loose or imaginary
than strict as in a simulation [10]. This means that the created
scenarios may be less realisticeven metaphoric. Nonetheless,
the important point is that the model underlying the interaction
with the game should remain the same. Tipping the scales
towards either fantasy or realism in the design of serious games
has advantages as well as drawbacks in both cases. These
advantages and drawbacks relate to the capability to reflect
on the experience and possible inhibition in the behaviour
of players. To let players reflect on what has happened in
the game, they need to transfer the knowledge gained from
their experience to knowledge related to the real world. When
opting for realism in a serious game, the gap that needs to
be bridged between the simulated world and the real world
to transfer the attained knowledge is smaller than when the
simulated world less closely represents the real world. On
the other hand, this distance from the real world is at the
same time an advantage of less realistic scenarios. This is the
case because players are more free to do what they want
not because of the possibly larger amount of actions they can
perform in the game, but because they may be less inhibited
by the design of the system. For example, when police trainees
practice using a strict simulation, as in the enacted interviews
from the previous section, they will feel the need to do
everything correctly. Serious games allow for experimentation
as they may put less pressure to perform on the trainees. The
crux lies in the actual design of serious games so that they
still provide a challenge and convey their learning goals. To
assist us in the design process, we have created a hierarchy
of learning goals that our games should support [11], based
on Blooms revised Taxonomy of Learning Objectives [12].
Below, we explain how we intend to use two techniques to
support the attainment of these learning goals in our serious
games.
B. Techniques for Improving Learning in Serious Games
In our serious games, we do not opt for maximum realism
or fantasy, but for a balance between the two. To do so,
we take inspiration from techniques used in improvisational

theatre (improv) and live action role play (larp) [10], [13].
This is not merely an attempt to gamify a social simulation
by adding some simple game mechanics to the whole. Instead,
we combine techniques from various fields together during the
design process of POINTER and LOITER, with feedback from
the Dutch police.
We take the point of view that when a simulation or role
play is carried out, the people involved in these events have
two different roles: that of the actor, who has knowledge
about the simulation, and that of the character, who is being
simulated by the actor. Both in improv and role plays, this
distinction between in-character (IC) and out-of-character
(OOC) roles can be utilized by the players. For example, a
player may know, OOC, that another character has deceived
his characterbut this players character may not know. The
player can then use this OOC knowledge to steer the play IC
in a certain direction.
In the design of our serious games, we expand the distinction between in-character and out-of-character by looking at so-called meta-techniques used in larp [11]. These
are techniques with which players can communicate OOC
informationinformation that would normally not be available to them IC. Effectively, these techniques impinge upon
the otherwise simulated nature of larp as they can not take
place in-character. An examples of such a meta-technique is
the inner voice, which lets players speak out their IC thoughts
so that the other players get insight into how these players feel.
Act breaks can serve as intermissions during a larp in which
the IC play is paused and the players discuss OOC what has
happened and what may happen in the play. With the help of
such meta-techniques, players of a larp can deepen a larp by
exploring the feelings and motivations of their characters.
As explained above, reflection and feedback on their actions
constitute a large part of the learning process for trainees.
Therefore, when police trainees practice their skills with actors, their experience is evaluated during an after-action review.
We choose a similar approach in our serious games by implementing meta-techniques that offer moments for reflection
and feedback during gameplay. In our games, when players
interact with virtual characters, we will enable these characters
to express their thoughts to players in the form of comic-like
thought bubbles, alike to the inner voice technique. Such
information would assist players in determining the attitude
and feelings of characters as a supplement to the signals
they read from the nonverbal behaviour and utterances of
characters. We are also exploring how act breaks can be
implemented. For example, at set points during gameplay,
the interaction can be paused to give players and characters
the opportunity to ask each other questions. These questions
include asking the reasons for certain actions or inquiring
about the feelings of either the characters or players at specific
points in the interaction.
Key in implementing these techniques is the decision when
they should be used. As in all games, there needs to be a
balance between the challenge of the game and the skill level
of the player. Therefore, we propose to monitor the progress

of players during the game and provide them with help in
the form of the above meta-techniques when they seem not
to be up to the challenge. For example, when players keep
acting aggressively in an interaction with the effect being that
a virtual character does not cooperate, this character may use
a thought bubble to give feedback on why the interaction
is unsuccessful. Alternatively, an act break may be used to
have a more in-depth discussion as to what went wrong. Both
techniques may also be used together to reinforce each other.
For example, if a character shows a thought bubble during
gameplay to provide feedback, it can explain its thoughts in
more detail during a subsequent act break.
Aside from providing feedback and reflection, we are investigating ways to let the virtual characters adapt their behaviour
to help players achieve their learning goals. This adaptation
reflects the methods used in improv and role play as well:
the virtual characters are able to adapt their behaviour to
the learning goals of players. For example, if it turns out
that a player has difficulties to negotiate with withdrawn
people, the virtual characters can choose to behave more
withdrawn, providing the player with the possibility to gain
more experience with such interactions.
V. I MPLEMENTATIONS
As said above, we are designing two serious game prototypes: POINTER for interview training and LOITER for
street intervention training for police officers. Until now, we
have largely focused on the conceptual and technical aspects
underlying these systems. Currently, we are exploring how
to implement our games. The balance between realism and
fantasy plays an important role in visualising the interactions.
We do not choose a highly realistic appearance for our
games, as this will stand at odds with the meta-techniques
we wish to use. Additionally, it may evoke false expectations
when players expect behaviour from very realistic looking
characters that may be more complex than our cognitive model
supports. Therefore, we opt to keep things simple in terms of
graphical quality, but we do investigate the effects of different
types of visualisations. Using AGENT, the Awareness Game
Environment for Natural Training [14], we are able to let
players play the same scenario with different user interfaces.
The two types of interfaces we are developing have different
fidelities. One is a 2D visualisation with a comic-like style
and interaction through button commands, see Fig. 1. The
other is a 3D visualisation with higher fidelity, see Fig 2. In
an improved version, this visualisation will offer multi-modal
input to attempt to stimulate the feeling of presence in the
virtual world. While providing a more realistic environment in
terms of graphical quality, the 3D environment is not intended
to feature strictly realistic character behaviour.
To experiment with different game mechanics and concepts
that we can incorporate in POINTER and LOITER, a board
game called Sequacious was created, see Fig. 3. This was
done to give an indication that a very playful system can
already give rise to reflection and can be used to improve the
players awareness of social interaction. In this game, players

Fig. 1.

The prototype 2D environment for LOITER.

Fig. 3. The board game Sequacious with a juvenile pawn on the far left and
a police pawn next to it.

cognitive model we have created by letting players provide
feedback on the virtual characters in the system themselves.
Lastly, we hope to encourage other researchers to look beyond
simulations by investigating other ways to design educational
systems, such as serious games and techniques from the arts.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Fig. 2.

A prototype 3D environment for LOITER.

(police officers in training) can experience and experiment
with different ways of interacting with loitering juveniles. This
can be done through letting them assume either of two roles
in the game: the role that they normally play, namely that of
a police officer, or the role of the group of juveniles. The
game is played on a gridded board with the juveniles trying
to form groups and grow in numbers and the police officer
having the goal of keeping the groups of loitering juveniles
as small as possible by dispersing the juveniles and stopping
them from taking over control of the board. Together with
more game mechanics that are related to the needs of both
parties, Sequacious lets players explore this conflict. After play
sessions, we observed that players were enthusiastic about the
game and discussed tactics for winning the game by either
side and how the gameplay could relate to the real world.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
The approach we take in designing POINTER and LOITER,
our serious games for interpersonal skills training in the
domain of law enforcement, expands the possibilities of social
simulation by infusing it with techniques from the fields of
improv and role play. Our next step is to implement and
evaluate our ideas in more detail. The serious games will
not replace the teachers of the Dutch police, but serve as
addenda to the training curriculum. Through evaluation and
further cooperation with the Dutch police, we seek to fit
our games in their curriculum and find the correct balance
between fantasy and realism so that they will be accepted by
the trainees. Additionally, we wish to iteratively improve the

View publication stats

This publication was supported by the Dutch national program COMMIT.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Swartout, Lessons learned from virtual humans, AI Mag., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 920, 2010.
[2] R. Aylett, S. Louchart, J. Dias, A. Paiva, and M. Vala, FearNot! An
experiment in emergent narrative, in Proc. of IVA, 2005, pp. 305316.
[3] F. Vaassen and J. Wauters, deLearyous: Training interpersonal communication skills using unconstrained text input, in Proc. of ECGBL,
2012, pp. 505513.
[4] R. C. Hubal, G. A. Frank, and C. I. Guinn, Lessons learned in modeling
schizophrenic and depressed responsive virtual humans for training, in
Proc. of IUI, 2003, pp. 8592.
[5] M. Bruijnes, J. M. Linssen, H. J. A. op den Akker, M. Theune,
S. Wapperom, C. Broekema, and D. K. J. Heylen, Social Behaviour in
Police Interviews: Relating Data to Theories. Berlin: Springer, 2014.
[6] T. Leary, Interpersonal diagnosis of personality: Functional theory and
methodology for personality evaluation. New York, NY: Ronald Press,
1957.
[7] E. Goffman, Interaction ritual: Essays in face to face behavior.
Chicago, IL: Aldine Transaction, 2005.
[8] L. Tickle-Degnen and R. Rosenthal, The nature of rapport and its
nonverbal correlates, Psychol. Inq., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 285293, 1990.
[9] M. Koops and M. Hoevenaar, Conceptual change during a serious
game: Using a Lemniscate model to compare strategies in a physics
game, Simulation & Gaming, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 544561, 2013.
[10] D. Richards and N. Szilas, Challenging reality using techniques from
interactive drama to support social simulations in virtual worlds, in
Proc. of IE, 2012.
[11] J. M. Linssen and M. Theune, Meta-techniques for a social awareness
learning game, in Proc. of ECGBL, In press.
[12] D. R. Krathwohl, A revision of Blooms taxonomy: An overview,
Theory into Practice, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 212218, 2002.
[13] B. Medler and B. Magerko, The implications of improvisational acting
and role-playing on design methodologies, in Proc. of SIGCHI, 2010,
pp. 483492.
[14] J. M. Linssen and T. F. de Groot, Agent: Awareness Game Environment
for Natural Training, in Proc. of FDG, 2013, pp. 433434.

