See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225206207

"FearNot!": A computer-based anti-bullying-programme designed to foster
peer intervention
Article in European Journal of Psychology of Education  March 2011
DOI: 10.1007/s10212-010-0035-4

CITATIONS

READS

79

1,374

12 authors, including:
Natalie Vannini

Maria Sapouna

University of Wuerzburg

University of the West of Scotland

14 PUBLICATIONS 402 CITATIONS

16 PUBLICATIONS 678 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Dieter Wolke
The University of Warwick
564 PUBLICATIONS 27,395 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

CoReader View project

LEIF "Lernausgangslagen erheben - individuell frdern" View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Ruth Aylett on 20 May 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Eur J Psychol Educ
DOI 10.1007/s10212-010-0035-4

FearNot!: a computer-based anti-bullying-programme
designed to foster peer intervention
Natalie Vannini & Sibylle Enz & Maria Sapouna & Dieter Wolke & Scott Watson &
Sarah Woods & Kerstin Dautenhahn & Lynne Hall & Ana Paiva & Elizabeth Andr &
Ruth Aylett & Wolfgang Schneider

Received: 5 June 2009 / Revised: 8 January 2010
# Instituto Superior de Psicologia Aplicada, Lisboa, Portugal and Springer Science+Business Media BV 2010

Abstract Bullying is widespread in European schools, despite multiple intervention
strategies having been proposed over the years. The present study investigates the
effects of a novel virtual learning strategy (FearNot!) to tackle bullying in both UK
and German samples. The approach is intended primarily for victims to increase their
coping skills and further to heighten empathy and defence of victims by non-involved
bystanders. This paper focuses on the defender role. Applying quantitative as well as
qualitative methodology, the present study found that FearNot! helped non-involved
children to become defenders in the German sub-sample while it had no such effect in
the UK sub-sample. German New Defenders (children who are initially uninvolved
N. Vannini (*) : W. Schneider
Institute of Psychology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany
e-mail: natalie.vannini@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de
W. Schneider
e-mail: schneider@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de
S. Enz
Gruppe fuer Interdisziplinaere Psychologie, Universitaet Bamberg, Bamberg, Germany
e-mail: sibylle.enz@uni-bamberg.de
M. Sapouna : D. Wolke
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
M. Sapouna
e-mail: maria.sapouna@scotland.gsi.gov.uk
D. Wolke
e-mail: D.Wolke@warwick.ac.uk
S. Watson : S. Woods
School of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK
S. Watson
URL: http://adapsys.feis.herts.ac.uk/
S. Woods
e-mail: s.n.woods@herts.ac.uk

N. Vannini et al.

but are nominated as defenders by their peers after the intervention period) were found
to be significantly more popular at baseline, and to show more cognitive empathy
(Theory of Mind) for the virtual victims as compared to permanently non-involved
pupils. Moreover, gender interacts with becoming a defender in its effects on affective
empathy, with emotional contagion being particularly associated with New Defender
status among girls. The findings are discussed in relation to previous research on antibullying intervention strategies and cultural differences in bullying prevalence rates and
intervention outcomes.
Keywords Empathy . Peer intervention . Role-play . School bullying .
Virtual learning environment

Introduction
Bullying is of widespread interest for teachers, parents, pupils and researchers alike.
Effective intervention approaches are needed given the high prevalence rates across
countries worldwide and the serious consequences of bullying. Worldwide prevalence
estimations ranging from 4% to 32% (see Stassen Berger 2007), however, it is important to
note that there are large variations in prevalence rates between countries depending among
others on focus of study, data source and methodological approach of assessment as well as
applied definition of bullying, The negative impact bullying has on the development and
further life condition of children involved in this sub-category of aggressive behaviour
range from behaviour and school adjustment problems, poor physical health, high levels of
depression and anxiety to even psychotic symptoms (see, e.g. Arseneault et al. 2006; Bond
et al. 2001; Fekkes et al. 2006; Nansel et al. 2004; Schreier et al. 2009). Moreover, the
impact of school bullying goes beyond those directly involved (i.e. victims and bullies) and
affects most members of the relevant social group (i.e. classes, schools). For instance,
Hazler (1996) noted that bystanders are not immune to the negative consequences of
bullying because their self-respect decreases every time they witness bullying but do not
engage in stopping it.

K. Dautenhahn
School of Computer Science, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK
URL: http://homepages.feis.herts.ac.uk/comqkd/
L. Hall
Department of Computing, Engineering and Technology, University of Sunderland, Sunderland, UK
e-mail: lynne.hall@sunderland.ac.uk
A. Paiva
INESC-ID, Instituto Superior Tcnico, Lisbon, Portugal
e-mail: ana.paiva@inesc-id.pt
E. Andr
Institut fuer Informatik, Universitaet Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany
e-mail: andre@informatik.uni-augsburg.de
R. Aylett
School of Maths and Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK
e-mail: ruth@macs.hw.ac.uk

FearNot!

Bullying
The phenomenon of school bullying is defined as intentional and repeated aggression
towards weaker peers: A student is being bullied or victimised when he or she is exposed,
repeatedly and over time, to negative actions on the part of one or more other students.
(Olweus 2001, p. 56). Typical characteristics for this sub-category of aggressive behaviour
are the real or perceived power imbalance between perpetrators and victims, and its
systematic repetition over time. Bullying can become apparent in different behaviours such
as direct verbal (blackmailing, calling names, etc.), physical (hitting, kicking, stealing, etc.)
behaviour, as well as indirect behaviour including the manipulation of social relations, e.g.
spreading rumours or the deliberate ending of friendships (Bjrkqvist et al. 1994; Crick and
Grotpeter 1995). The forms of bullying seem to vary by gender: boys are more engaged in
direct physical bullying while girls are rather victims or bullies of indirect forms (Olweus
1996; Scheithauer et al. 2006; Whitney and Smith 1993). However, no differences between
boys and girls are found when it comes to direct verbal bullying (Scheithauer et al. 2003).
Like other forms of aggression, bullying has to be seen largely in relation to the social or
group context in which it occurs: in the vast majority of bullying episodes, peers take over
various roles ranging from active participants to passive bystanders (Hawkins et al. 2001;
OConnell et al. 1999; Salmivalli et al. 1996; Sutton and Smith 1999). The majority of
presented peers are passive onlookers who in fact disapprove of bullying (Charach et al.
1995; Rigby and Slee 1992) but at the same time often underestimate their responsibility
within the bullying process (Salmivalli 1999; 2001). Even though bystanders sometimes
show the courage to stand up for the victim, which is the case in about 1020% of the
bullying events (Hawkins et al. 2001; Salmivalli et al. 1996), the most common response is
to ignore what is going on or even to sympathise with the bully rather than with the victim
(Tapper and Boulton 2005). By providing attention and assistance to those who are bullies,
bystanders contribute to the problem by inadvertently reinforcing the bully, and the bullying
is more likely perpetuated (Jeffrey et al. 2001; Rodkin 2004). The outcome is different
when bystanders do intervene: Hawkins et al. (2001) reported that in 57% of all cases the
bullying actually stops. This reflects the important role peers are playing in the process of
bullying and implies their importance as target group of intervention programmes (Stassen
Berger 2007; OConnell et al. 1999), which according to Espelage et al. (2003) is an often
disregarded aspect of aggression prevention efforts.
Peer intervention approach: pedagogical role-play
There is reason to assume that an effective programme targeted at peer intervention has to
account for the variety of aspects why bystanders may hesitate to intervene during the
aggressive interaction. Following social psychological research these aspects include, i.e.
responsibility diffusion (Latan and Darley 1968). A second aspect might be the fear of
retaliation (OConnell et al. 1999): children will not risk becoming the next victim. A third
aspect relates to an inappropriate comprehension of the bullying dynamics, and finally the
insecurity of what to do to counteract bullying effectively might be another important
reason for bystanders apathy when faced with bullying episodes (Craig et al. 2000;
OConnell et al. 1999). Hazler (1996) concluded that the audience of bullying are those
who are recognising what is going on but at the same time are not aware of the importance
of their role including the responsibility to take practical actions. Therefore, effective
intervention that aims at involving the peer group needs to increase the awareness of ones
own role with its individual responsibility and the empathy for the victims, as well as the

N. Vannini et al.

understanding of the ongoing bullying process. Moreover, it should provide children with
effective strategies to intervene (Frey et al. 2005). Given that bystanders often justify their
lack of empathy by blaming the victim (Stassen Berger 2007) encouraging empathy
towards the victims therefore seems particularly important.
Empathy is defined by contemporary researchers as a bi-component construct,
embracing affective and cognitive aspects. While some researchers include both aspects
in their empathy definitions (Davis 1994; Steinmetz and Holz-Ebeling 1995), others
emphasise either the one or the other. According to Hogan (1969, p.308) empathy
means the intellectual or imaginative apprehension of anothers condition or state of mind
without actually experiencing that persons feelings (cognitive empathy), whereas
Hoffman (1977, p.169) posits that empathy [is] a vicarious affective response to
others (affective empathy). In the present study, empathy is defined as an observers
understanding of the internal state of a target (cognitive empathy or Theory of Mind;
Flavell 2004) as well as the observers emotional reaction to what he/she perceives as being
the internal state of a target (affective empathy).
A method that facilitates understanding and empathy in social interaction is pedagogical
role-play (Hollin and Tower 1986; LAbate and Milan 1985; Van Mets 1991). Role-play
provides a safe as-if framework for exploring experiences of self and other: taking over
the roles of others and acting out their actions provides a first-person experience of the
thoughts and feelings that lead to and result from these other actions. Role-play thus
ultimately helps to modify own behaviour and attitudes in order to better adjust to the
challenges of social interaction, because it helps to understand better the thoughts, feelings,
and action tendencies of others and how they are tied to our own thoughts, feelings, and
actions. The explicit as-if mode results from the fact that role-play is introduced and
implemented as game-like and unreal, but offers real social experiences and insights that
are transferable to real social interactions. For instance, by focusing on the holistic
experience of another person, role-play has proved to be an effective tool in the context of
social skills trainings applied in schools and therapeutical settings (Hungerige and BorgLaufs 2001; Jupp and Griffiths 1990; Wright 2006). However, role-play is a rather timeconsuming and staff-intensive pedagogical technique which frequently coincides with a
school reality that is driven by curriculum needs. Furthermoreand perhaps more
importantit requires groups of pupils that are involved in real-life social situations. This
may cause problems because victimised children might be less able to express their
suffering and anxieties in front of the whole class, even more so if their perpetrators are
present as well. This notion reflects the importance for intervention strategies to
differentially acknowledge and tackle the active and passive roles of children involved in
the bullying process. An approach which seems to provide the required assets and
minimises the aforementioned drawbacks of pedagogical role-play is the use of computerbased simulations of complex social realities.
FearNot!intervention
FearNot! version 2.0 (Fun with Empathic Agents to Achieve Novel Outcomes in
Teaching; Aylett et al. 2005) is a prototype of a virtual simulation designed to mirror a
primary school environment, peopled with cartoon-like virtual characters who take on the
different bullying roles (bully, victim, bully-assistants, defenders of victims, bystanders).
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the German FearNot! version.
In this virtual learning environment, episodes of bullying in which sequences of direct
and indirect bullying actions occur between the virtual characters are observed by the

FearNot!
Fig. 1 Screenshot of a bullying
episode within FearNot!
(German version)

children. In between these episodes, children take over an active part in the ongoing story
by counselling the victim regarding coping strategies to handle the repeated bullying. Thus
children take over the role of an invisible friend to the victimised character and can watch
how the story further develops as a result of their advices. As a consequence, the users can
affectively engage with what happens and at the same time benefit from the as-if mode of
the virtual drama, not being involved directly but being able to distance themselves when
needed (Hall et al. 2005). Recent pilot studies investigating a one-time use of FearNot!
could show that the virtual characters are believable and evoke sympathy for the victimised
character (Watson et al. 2007; Woods et al. 2003). FearNot! consists of male or female
bullying episodes (with male episodes including more physical bullying and female
episodes more relational bullying), and English and German language versions are available
(for more details on the technical framework of FearNot! see e.g. Dias and Paiva 2005).
For the present study, FearNot! was implemented at primary schools in the UK and
Germany. For three consecutive weeks, children of the intervention group worked with
FearNot! for the duration of 30 min per week. During each session, children interacted
individually with the programme and returned to the same computer in order to continue
their particular story in subsequent sessions. Class teachers were briefed on the purposes
and methodology of the study and were provided with instructions to supervise the
interaction sessions. All children first played the episodes matching their own gender. After
having completed these episodes they could switch to the other gender scenarios if they
liked, with the majority of children using this option. Other publications have presented
results of this study which demonstrate that FearNot! is a safe intervention in so far as it
does not increase bullying as well as that the intervention with FearNot! had a short-term
effect on escaping victimization for a priori identified victims (for details, see Sapouna et al.
2009). Moreover, within the combined sample of UK and German participants it could be
found that in general UK pupils in comparison to German pupils possessed higher coping
strategy knowledge when faced with bullying incidences, but German childrens coping
strategy knowledge improved as a result of the FearNot! intervention (for details see
Watson et al. 2010).
Taking up the idea that inactive bystanders play an important role in perpetuating the
bullying, the present study examines whether FearNot! may foster peer intervention by
getting bystanders involved through raising their awareness of the bullying problem and

N. Vannini et al.

encouraging them to become pro-active when faced with bullying incidences (defenders).
To investigate this hypothesised effect on bystanders, the study analysed interaction
sequences with FearNot! such as coping strategies suggested to the virtual victim, as well
as empathic reactions to the victimised characters situation. FearNot! is designed to
foster empathy with the victimised character and to enhance the understanding of bullying
as a complex social phenomenon. Thus, any indication that empathy or Theory of Mind is
displayed during the interaction might serve as a sign that the learning goals of FearNot!
were achieved.

Method
Overall design and participants
The intervention evaluation employed a quasi-experimental, pre/post-test control group
design. Due to the technical requirements of the FearNot! software, it was not possible to
randomly allocate participants to experimental conditions (see Sapouna et al. 2009, for
details). Instead, classes were allocated to the intervention group whenever the software ran
properly on their schools computers, and allocated to the control group if it did not. This
increased the potential for successful implementation of the intervention in classes that
received FearNot!.
Twenty-six Key Stage 2 (year 5) primary school classes from the UK (Hertfordshire
and Warwickshire) and 22 third-grade primary school classes from Germany (Bavaria and
Hesse) took part, totalling 1,186 children. These primary schools were recruited by mailing
letters describing the study to the school principals, followed up by telephone calls and/or
personal visits to present the software and the study design in more detail to the school
staff. Schools were suitable to take part if they were state schools, mixed sex, and were not
already implementing another particular anti-bullying programme. The study was approved
by the Ethical Committees of the University of Warwick and the University of
Hertfordshire (UK), and the Bavarian and Hesse Ministry of Education (Germany). Class
teachers of eligible classes (childrens age 711 years) decided if their classes took part in
the study. Parents were informed by letters describing the study in detail, and had to give
their consent in written form before the study began. Forty-nine children had no parental
consent and four children joined the study during or after the intervention period and
therefore were excluded from the data set. The remaining sample of N=1,133 included 530
(47%) children in the intervention group and 603 (53%) children in the control group; 642
(57%) pupils from the UK and 491 (43%) from Germany. The sample consisted of 587
(52%) boys and 546 (48%) girls, with an age range between 7 and 11 years (M=8.9; SD=
0.7; n=9 missing data). There was a significant age difference between both countries [t
(1,122)=30.91; p <0.001]: UK pupils were about 1 year older (M=9.36, SD=0.52) than the
pupils from Germany (M=8.35, SD=0.55).
Materials
Class-level measures included the class size (total number of pupils in each class) and a
dichotomous measure of class socio-economic status (SES). SES was computed based on
teachers responses to a single item asking the teachers to indicate the percentage of
children in their class that were eligible for welfare benefits. Classes with less than 10% of
students entitled to welfare benefits were coded as high SES classes.

FearNot!

Children reported on their gender, age, number of siblings and gave information on the
family situation (e.g. indicating with whom they lived at home: mother, father, step mother,
step father, foster parents) in a standard questionnaire. Socio-demographic information of
the pupils was assessed by two questions: following Coie et al. (1982), the Like Most
assessment was represented by the question who are your friends in the class, and the
question who do like the least in your class represented the Like Least assessment.
Bullying involvement was assessed by four peer nomination items adapted from Wolke et
al. (2001) that asked participants to name up to three classmates whom they knew to be
victims of bullying, both either direct (children who get hit/beaten up, having things stolen,
get threatened/blackmailed, are being called nasty names and having nasty tricks played on
them) or relational (children who are being left out of games; are having other children
telling them they do not want to be their friends anymore; are having nasty lies or stories
told about them) or to bully others, also both either direct (hit other children/beat other
children up, steal things, threaten/blackmail others, call nasty names, play nasty tricks on
others), or relational (leave others out of games, tell others that they will not be their friends
anymore, tell nasty stories or lies about others) in the past month. An additional peer
nomination item (adapted from Schfer and Korn 2004; Salmivalli et al. 1996, respectively)
asked the children to name up to six classmates who tell bullies to stop the harassments of
others, reflecting an assertive and active form of peer intervention (defender nomination).
All questions (questionnaires) were available in German and English, and were back- and
forward-translated (van de Vijver and Hambleton 1996) to ensure comparability of the
questions between both countries. Pupils were equipped with a list of all pupils in each
class to fill in these questions.
Moreover, data from different sourcescollected during and directly after the first
interaction with FearNot!included:




Number of Coping Strategies: during the interaction with FearNot!, pupils engaged
as invisible friends to the victimised character and tried to help them offering their
advice. Pupils provided suggestions of coping strategies as well as justifications for
these suggestions by typing in freely via the keyboard which was recorded by the
system. The coping strategies were categorised using the 18 categories specified in
Table 1.
Theory of Mind: justifications were categorised regarding childrens Theory-of-Mindrelated content of statements (0 = no signs of ToM; 1 = statements that take

Table 1 Coping strategies
categories

Coping strategies
Ignore the bully

Avoid the bully

Start crying

Change yourself

Walk away/run away

Confront the bully assistant

Blame yourself

Make a new friend

Stay off school/feign illness

Tell someone/ask someone
for help

Stand up to the bully/tell him to stop Tell teacher/ask teacher for help
Fight back

Tell parents/ask parents for help

Call the bully names

Tell/Ask bystander/defender
for help

Laugh it off

Other

N. Vannini et al.



consequences of coping strategies into account; 2=statements that take consequences
of coping strategies into account which affect the internal mental state of others).
Affective Empathy: directly after each interaction with FearNot!, pupils filled in a
form where they rated the affective state of the victimised character as well as their
own affective state on five adjectives: anxious, sad, angry, happy, and aggressive on a
four-point scale (not at all, somewhat, pretty much, very much). Affective empathy
scores were computed from these data transforming the raw scores into binary variables
(0=no match; 1=match). Matches of emotions for self and victimised character were
summed, yielding an empathy index with a maximum of 5 (matches in all five
emotions) and a minimum of 0 (no matches).

Procedure
At three time points (T1, T2, T3) the questionnaire battery was administered on a class by
class basis by the authors. Intervention and control groups received two questionnaire
administration sessions (T1 and T2) before and after a 3-week period during which the
children of the intervention group worked with the FearNot! software, whereas the
children of the control group continued with their standard school lessons. A further
questionnaire administration (T3) was conducted 5 weeks later. As the questions of the
bullying involvement at each time point referred to the past four weeks, the administration
at T1 (baseline) reflects the 4-week period before the intervention, questions administered
at T2 assess bullying involvement during the intervention period, whereas T3 is an
assessment of the four weeks after the intervention period.
To provide participants with a common definition of bullying, researchers conducted an
educational session at the beginning of the first questionnaire administration (T1)
presenting definitions of direct and relational forms of bullying in the intervention and
control group, and ensured with a discussion (question and answer) section that the children
had a common sense of the study subject.

Statistical analyses
Allocation bias analysis
As schools could not be allocated randomly in the intervention or control group condition,
we initially analysed if there were significant differences of core characteristics between
pupils (gender, age, living arrangements at home) and classes (class size, socio-economic
status) of both groups, respectively. For this purpose, a series of chi-square tests for the
categorical variables and T tests for the continuous variables were conducted.
Prevalence of bullying involvement at baseline
In a first step of analysis, we examined the bullying involvement at baseline (T1). The two
bully nomination items as well as the two victim nomination items correlated strongly
(direct and relational victim nomination Cronbach's alpha=0.85; direct and relational bully
nomination Cronbach's alpha=0.87). Accordingly, children were categorised as (pure)
victim or (pure) bully if they had received nominations at least one standard deviation (SD)

FearNot!

above the class mean nomination score in at least one of each category (see von Mares and
Petermann 2008), and at least a 0.5 SD difference between victim versus bully nomination,
respectively. Z scores were used to account for different class sizes within the sample. We
assigned children to the bully/victim (aggressive victim) role if they had received average
nominations (at least one SD above the mean nomination within the class) in at least one of
the bully peer nomination items (direct or relational) as well as in at least one of the victim
peer nomination items (direct or relational), and the difference between both (bully versus
victim nomination) was lower than 0.5 SD. Pupils were identified as (pure) defenders if
they had their highest nomination score (at least one SD above the class mean nomination
value) on the defender nomination item, and at least a 0.5 SD difference between defender
nomination score and victim and/or bully nomination score.
To test for differences in overall bullying involvement between the intervention and the
control groups, countries, and genders, respectively, chi-square tests were applied.
To examine if the children of the different bullying involvement groups differ with
regard to their Social Preferences values we conducted a between-subject ANOVA, using
bullying roles as independent and Social Preference as the dependent variable. As
suggested by Peery (1979), Social Preference (SP) was determined by subtracting the z-like
least values from the z-like most values (zLMzLL=SP).
FearNot! intervention and New Defender status
The two samplesUK and German samplewere analysed separately with regard to their
New Defender status during the intervention period (T2) and four weeks after the
FearNot! intervention (T3). Children were assigned to New Defender T2 (and/or New
Defender T3)-category, if they had their highest (at least one SD above the mean
nomination within the class) z score in the defender nomination category, and if that
defender nomination z score was at least 0.5 SD above the nominations in any other (bully
and/or victim) category. To test for differences between the intervention and the control
groups, chi-square tests were applied. Furthermore, we fitted a multilevel logistic regression
model to test intervention effects on the odds of becoming a New Defender at T2 and T3,
while controlling for gender and age. Multilevel models account for the lack of
independence introduced by hierarchically nested data (i.e. students nested within classes)
by allowing effects to vary randomly across level-2 units (i.e. classes). Hierarchical linear
modelling analyses were conducted with HLM 6.0 (Bryk et al. 1996).
New Defender status and Social Preference
To test for differences in Social Preference values between pupils categorised as New
Defenders and permanently non-involved children as well as between the genders within
the group of New Defenders, t tests were applied. Furthermore, to investigate whether
popularity of New Defenders increases from T1 to T2 and T3, an analysis of variance
(ANOVA, with repeated measurements) with the Social Preference scores at T1, T2 and T3
was conducted including the New Defender and permanently non-involved status,
respectively, as between-subject factor.
New Defender status and FearNot! interaction styles
In order to investigate whether New Defenders and permanently non-involved pupils
differed in their interaction with the software application, a between-subject MANOVA

N. Vannini et al.

was conducted, with defender status (permanently non-involved children versus New
Defenders) and gender as independent variables and four dependent variables that
represent the interaction style:





Number of episodes the pupil has worked through during the FearNot! session;
Number of coping strategies suggested to the victimised character;
Affective empathy in the sense of emotional contagion, assessed by match of emotional
states ascribed to the victimised character and the self;
Theory of Mind in the justifications offered for their suggested coping strategies

The first of three interaction sessions was chosen for these analyses, following the
assumption that it imposed the most powerful impression on the pupils. Moreover, sample
sizes were largest for the first compared to the other interaction sessions.

Results
Allocation bias analysis
The allocation bias analysis indicated that there were no significant baseline differences
between the pupils of the intervention and the control group in terms of gender, age or
living arrangement (family composition) at home. Moreover, intervention and control
classes were similar with respect to size and SES. Table 2 gives an overview of the
details.
Table 2 Baseline pupils and class-level characteristics
Experimental condition
Characteristica

Interventionb

Controlb

Gender,% femalec

266 (50%)

280 (46%)

Agec

8.93 (0.8)

8.91 (0.7)

493 (98%)
389 (77%)

543 (97%)
438 (79%)

Family living arrangements
% living with motherc
% living with fatherc
% living with step-motherc

6 (1%)

9 (2%)

% living with step-fatherc

29 (6%)

36 (7%)

% living with foster parentsc
% having siblingsc

4 (1%)
463 (91%)

8 (1%)
497 (89%)

Class characteristics
Class sizec
% High SESc

23.17 (6.7)
14 (70%)

26.17 (3.6)
10 (50%)

SES socio-economic status
Intervention group: N=530; control group: N=603
a

Data are mean (SD) or number (%)

b

Numbers may not sum to sample totals because of missing values

c

There were no significant differences between the two groups at the.05 level (chi-square test for categorical
variables and t-test for continuous variables)

FearNot!

Prevalence of bullying involvement at baseline
Overall, the bullying involvement based on the peer nomination data included 279 children
(25%, nominated as either [direct or relational] bully, victim or bullyvictim) at baseline.
More specifically, n=103 (9%) children were nominated as bully, n=134 (12%) pupils were
nominated as victims, and n=42 (4%) children were nominated as bullyvictims. Analysing
the nominations of the sub-sample of both countries separately indicated that n=64 UK
children (10% of total UK sub-sample, n=642) versus n=39 German children (8% of total
German sub-sample, n=491) were named as bullies by their classmates, n=100 (16%)
children from the UK versus n=34 (7%) German pupils were nominated as victims, and n=
39 (6%) UK pupils versus n=3 (1%) children from Germany assigned to the bullyvictim
category.
There were no significant differences in overall bullying involvement between the
intervention and the control groups (n=127 versus n=152, respectively). There was no
significant difference in overall bullying involvement between both genders (n=123 girls
versus n=156 boys) but examining bullying involvement separately by bullying type (direct
versus relational versus direct/relational bullying) a significant difference was found:
more girls (n=94) were nominated to be involved in relational bullying than boys (n=65)
[2 (1)=8.85, p<0.01]; more boys (n=33) than girls (n=9) were involved in direct
bullying [2 (1)=12.51, p<0.001] and more boys (n=58) than girls (n=20) were
nominated to be involved in relational as well as in direct bullying [2 (1)=17.06, p<
0.001]. Furthermore, we found a significant difference in bullying involvement between
both sub-samples: significantly more UK pupils (n=203) were nominated in either of the
bullying categories than German pupils (n=76) [2 (1)=39.05, p<0.001].
Of the 1,133 children assessed at baseline, n=84 were identified as defenders (7.4%).
Significant differences were found between defender status and countries as well as
between defender status and gender. More UK (n=59) than German (n=25) pupils were
nominated as defenders by their classmates [2 (1)=6.81, p<0.01], whereas significantly
more girls (n=52) than boys (n=32) received nominations in this category [2 (1)=8.83,
p=0.01].
The conducted ANOVA regarding the Social Preference values of the different
bullying involvement groups revealed a significant main effect of bullying roles [F (4,
1,128)=38.62, p<0.001]. Post hoc analyses (Bonferroni comparisons) showed that
defenders were significantly more popular than all other groups (for means and standard
deviations see Table 3).

Table 3 Mean and standard deviation of Social Preference per bullying role
Baseline bullying roles

Social Preference (SP)
N

Mean

SD

Bully

103

0.98

2.25

Victim

134

0.75

1.89

42

0.61

1.73

770

0.20

1.35

Defender

84

1.30

1.25

Summary

1133

0.03

1.63

Bullyvictim
Non-involved children

N. Vannini et al.

FearNot! intervention and New Defender status
To examine whether FearNot! has the potential to foster peer intervention, we conducted
further analyses with the baseline sample of non-involved children, focusing on their
nomination as New Defender at the second and third assessment time points (T2 & T3).
This sample of N=770 (68%) not directly involved children included 369 (48%) pupils in
the intervention and 401 (52%) pupils in the control group; of these children, 380 (49%)
children came from the UK and 390 (51%) children from Germany. There were 399 (52%)
boys and 371 (48%) girls with an age range from 7 to 11 years (M=8.84; SD=0.74). Given
the significant differences in age and bullying involvement between the UK and German
sub-samples at baseline, we analysed both samples separately with regard to their New
Defender status during the intervention period (T2) and four weeks after the FearNot!
intervention (T3). Table 4 presents the numbers of New Defenders at both time points
separately for the UK and German sub-samples.
As Table 4 shows, in the UK sub-sample there were more New Defenders in the control
than intervention group at T2 and T3. However, these differences were not significant. Within
the German sub-sample, there were more New Defenders in the intervention than in the
control group at both assessments (T2 and T3). Also, a significant association between
experimental group and New Defender status could be found at T3 [2 (1)=5.079, p<0.05],
indicating that within the German sub-sample more children of the intervention than of the
control group became New Defenders within the 4-week period after the FearNot!
intervention. Furthermore, we fitted a multilevel logistic regression model to test intervention
effects on the odds of becoming a New Defender at T2 and T3, while controlling for gender
and age. Results revealed a marginally significant effect of experimental group membership
on New Defender status at T3 (OR, 3.07; CI, 0.8710.86; p=0.08), indicating that noninvolved children in the intervention group tended to be more likely to be classified as New
Defenders at T3 compared to non-involved children in the control group.
New Defender status and Social Preference
To test whether Social Preference at baseline is an important determinant factor of the New
Defender nomination at T2 and T3, we compared the baseline Social Preference values of
the 19 German children (12 girls and 7 boys; age M=8.32; SD=0.48) who were identified
as New Defenders at T2 and T3 (ten of those 19 children were nominated as New Defender

Table 4 New defender at T2 & T3 in each experimental group for UK and German sub-sample
New Defender

New Defender

New Defender

at T2

at T3

at T3

Baseline to T2

Baseline to T3

T2 to T3

Intervention Group

24

28

15

Country

UK:11: GE:13

UK:15; GE:13

UK 9; GE:6

Control Group

21

26

15

Country

UK:15;GE:6

UK:22; GE:4

UK 14; GE:1

Total

45

54

30

Country

UK:26;GE:19

UK:37;GE:17

UK:23,GE:7

UK United Kingdom, GE Germany

FearNot!

at both time points) with a randomly chosen group of 19 permanently non-involved
children of the German intervention group (n=19; 12 girls and seven boys; age M=8.32;
SD=0.48). The New Defenders and controls were matched regarding gender and age. We
found a significant group difference [t (36)=4.616, p>0.001] indicating that the children
who were identified as New Defenders at T2 and T3 were more popular (M=1.62; SD=
1.01) at the baseline assessment than children who stayed non-involved at T2 and T3 (M=
0.10; SD=1.03). There was no significant difference in popularity within the group of New
Defenders with regard to gender, although the seven boys (M=1.86; SD=1.02) scored
slightly higher than the 12 girls (M=1.49; SD=1.02) at baseline. Furthermore, an ANOVA,
with repeated measurements to test for increases in popularity of New Defenders from
baseline to T2 and T3 showed that there was neither a significant interaction effect of time
and status nor a significant within group change of Social Preference over time.
New defender status and FearNot! interaction styles
After having shown that in the German sample interacting with FearNot! increased
the number of previously uninvolved pupils that became defenders, and that these New
Defenders were more popular than permanently uninvolved pupils, the next step of our
analyses was to investigate whether pupils who became defenders during and after the
interaction with FearNot! differed in their interaction with the software application
from those children who remained bystanders throughout the testing period. Thus, we
categorised and analysed data assessed during the interaction regarding the number of
episodes played, the number of coping strategies suggested, and cognitive and affective
empathy. If systematic differences were found between groups, the conclusion that
FearNot! plays a role in stimulating role change would be strengthened. For the
German sample, n=119 pupils aged 79 years (M=8.29; SD =0.49) were included in this
sub-sample of which complete sets of data existed for the intervention as well as for the
bullying status nominations; of these children, 53 were male (45%) and 66 were female
(55%). A MANOVA was conducted testing for differences between New Defenders and
permanently non-involved pupils (between-subject factor) regarding their qualitative
interaction styles with the software (four dependent variables: Number of Episodes;
Number of Coping Strategies; Affective Empathy; Theory of Mind). It yielded a
significant main effect of Defender Status on Theory of Mind (ToM) represented in the
interaction data [F (3, 95)=5.53; p <0.05] showing that New Defenders displayed
significantly more ToM in the first interaction session with FearNot! than pupils who
remained non-involved throughout the study. We also found a significant main effect for
gender on the number of coping strategies [F (3, 95)=4.82; p<0.05], indicating that girls
suggest less coping strategies, but do work through equally many episodes (insignificant
effect of gender on number of episodes).
We furthermore found a significant interaction effect of GenderDefender Status on
emotional contagion [F (3, 95)=15.42; p<0.01], with New Defender girls reporting highest
scores of emotional contagion and New Defender boys reporting the lowest scores of
emotional contagion (see Fig. 2).

Discussion
The aim of the present study was to investigate the utility of the virtual learning
environment FearNot! with regard to fostering peer intervention in the framework of

N. Vannini et al.
Fig. 2 Interaction of gender and
defender status on affective
empathy scores (ND New
defender; NI permanently
non-involved pupils)

3

2,5

2

1,5

1

0,5
ND
NI
0
female

male

school bullying. For this purpose, we examined (new) defender peer nomination data of
non-involved children at two assessment time points, that is, during (T2) and after (T3) a 3week intervention period with the programme. Data were analysed for a sample of UK and
German primary school children. At the baseline assessment (T1), we found common
prevalence rates based on bullying roles peer nomination scales for both countries (see, e.g.
for Germany: Scheithauer et al. 2006; for the UK: Whitney and Smith 1993; for the UK and
Germany: Wolke et al. 2001), with more UK than German children being involved in
bullying as either bully and/or victims of direct and relational bullying. The sub-samples
also differed with regard to age: pupils from the UK were older than German pupils.
Confirming recent findings suggesting that not the overall bullying involvement (e.g. Craig
and Pepler 1997; Schuster 1997) but the bullying types vary by gender (e.g. Scheithauer et
al. 2006) we found no differences between genders with regard to the overall bullying
involvement but more girls than boys were involved in relational bullying whereas more
boys than girls were identified as bullies and/or victims of physical bullying.
An examination of baseline nominated defender status revealed that defender status
varied by country, gender, and also with respect to Social Preference: more UK than
German children and more girls than boys were nominated by their classmates as defenders
at baseline. The latter is in accord with previous findings on defender nomination indicating
that more girls than boys are nominated as defenders (Salmivalli et al. 1996). Furthermore,
in line with prior studies suggesting an association between pro-social behaviour and
popularity (Coie et al. 1990), we found that pupils who were nominated as defenders were
the most popular children within their classes.
Given these differences between both countries, we further examined both sub-samples
separately, and found that within the UK sample of baseline non-involved children there
was no significant distinction regarding the New Defender nomination between the
intervention and the control group at second and third assessment time points, whereas a
significant association between New Defender nomination and experimental group at the
third time point could be found for the German sample. A multilevel logistic regression
model suggested that at the third assessment point, German participants in the intervention
group tended to be more likely than control group participants to be classified as New
Defenders. Please note, however, that this finding was just short of being significant.
These results indicate that German children who were not directly involved in bullying
episodes before but had worked with FearNot! counteracted to bullying incidences in

FearNot!

their classes within the 4 weeks period after the intervention, reflecting the potential of
FearNot! for the German sub-sample to foster peer intervention when facing bullying
events.
An analysis of the data collected during and directly after the first interaction with
FearNot! provided some interesting insights into the differences between non-involved
pupils who ultimately became New Defenders and pupils who remained uninvolved in
bullying incidents. These results suggest that even though the number of episodes and the
number of coping strategies suggested to the victim character did not differ significantly
between New Defenders and permanently uninvolved pupils, cognitive empathy was
significantly higher for New Defenders as compared to permanently uninvolved pupils.
Thus, New Defenders initially showed more readiness to transpose themselves into those
involved in a (virtual) bullying incident than other pupils, suggesting that a high initial
tendency to take the perspectives of the bullies, the victims, and potential (adult) helpers
can lead to augmented responsibility when faced with real-life bullying incidents. This
result holds for both genders.
While cognitive empathy was operationalised by the ToM-related justifications provided
for cognitive strategy suggestions, affective empathy was operationalised as emotional
contagion in the present study. Regarding affective empathy, gender made a difference:
New Defender girls showed highest empathy scores, whereas New Defender boys showed
lowest empathy scores. This pattern of results indicates that for girls, affective reactions to
the plight of the bullied victim might add to their becoming active fighters against bullying,
whereas a clear lack of emotional contagion is associated with becoming active fighters
against bullying for boys. The cognitive understanding or Theory of Mind regarding the
victims situation is obviously not sufficient to make girls become active defenders, while
boys might even be hindered in becoming defenders by too much emotional contagion. The
reason for this different associations of emotional contagionor sympathising with the
victimfor boys and girls may imply differences in some aspects of emotional intelligence,
e.g. the ability to manage (potentially negative) emotions (Mayer and Salovey 1997), a
facet that might prove worthwhile to assess in future studies of the effects of bullying
intervention programmes on peer intervention.
Another interesting outcome of the study showed that children who became New
Defenders after the intervention were more popular than children who stayed non-involved
throughout and afterwards the intervention period. A higher social status could be a kind of
precondition with regard to ones successful or notable change from non-involved
participant of bullying episodes to an active defender. Therefore, our results support
previous notations including thatat least for boysa good standing within the social
group is necessary to successfully intervene in bullying incidences (Salmivalli et al. 1998).
We could not find that Social Preference of New Defenders increase throughout the
assessments, which may be due to the overall small sample size of New Defenders.
However, given the small size of the New Defender group, we did not investigate the role
of Social Preference any further but recommend that this issue is taken into account in
future studies of peer intervention programmes.
Unexpectedly, FearNot! could not unfold its potential within the UK sub-sample. The
study of Watson et al. (2010) which examined the educational impact of FearNot!
regarding the best and worst ways to cope with bullying within the present sample already
showed a cultural difference between both sub-samples. The German sample increased their
coping strategy knowledge in response to the intervention while the UK sample did not,
whereas the UK sample reported more knowledge regarding how to cope with bullying
than the German sub-sample all the way through the three assessments. The authors

N. Vannini et al.

concluded that this reflects the difference between both countries regarding the awareness
of bullying due to higher prevalence in the UK than in Germany (Watson et al. 2010; Wolke
et al. 2001). Indeed, in the present study, we found not only differences with regard to
bullying involvement of both countries at baseline but also regarding the level of previously
applied approaches to handle bullying within the schools. A short interview conducted with
the teachers who participated in the study showed that 18 of the 28 schools (16 UK schools
and two German schools) follow an anti-bullying school policy; seven UK schools had
participated in specific anti-bullying programmes before (e.g. SEALsay no to bullying
programme), whereas only one German school did so (Faustlos [engl. second step];
Cierpka 2001). Perhaps within the UK sample there is some ceiling effect with respect to
intervention approaches: the FearNot! softwarealthough being an innovative approach
with notable potentialmight not have provided any dramatically new insights for the UK
pupils and therefore did not make a difference in fostering neither peer intervention nor
coping strategy knowledge in UK pupilsan interesting assumption future studies will
have to investigate.
While the difference in effectiveness between the two countries under investigation is
obvious, apparently some limitations of the present study have also to be taken into account
when we discuss the previous considerations. First, defender status was measured using
only one item that reflects an assertive approach of peer intervention. The picture might
change if other forms of defender behaviour, i.e. comforting the victim after a bullying
episode, are assessed. Furthermore, the generalisability of the present results is limited due
to the fact that schools were not completely randomly assigned to both experimental
conditions because of technical requirements. Hence, differences between the intervention
and the control group might be attributable to differences that caused the variance in
schools technological equipment, even though this seems rather unlikely. Constraints
regarding the intervention itself include the limited interaction time with FearNot! (only
3 weeks): a longer period of working with FearNot! should have a greater impact, given
that other research has shown that long-term anti-bullying interventions achieve greater
success (see e.g. Olweus 2004; Smith et al. 2004). Another limitation of the present
intervention regards the lack of supplementing materials (e.g. lesson materials to induce
reflection, etc.). Effective real-life role-play approaches or other training approaches to
foster any social skills commonly include modules that trigger reflection which are
considered as necessary ingredients to support learning and transformational achievement
(Dewey 1993; Hatton and Smith 1995).
FearNot! isto the best of our knowledgethe first virtual learning environment
designed as an anti-bullying intervention in the field and the present study investigates the
impact of this novel approach on bystanders by testing the effect of repeated interaction.
The results indicate that the programme has potential fostering peer intervention among
primary school pupils given the limitations mentioned above. It is left to future studies to
provide insight in whether this potential of FearNot! also unfolds if other operationalisations of peer intervention are used, or in case FearNot! is directly compared to real-life
role-play approaches to investigate whether the assumed advantages of virtual role-play can
be supported.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank all the schools, teachers, and children who have taken part in
this study. In addition we would like to thank the following researchers, without whom this study would not
have been possible: Stefanie Brosch, Rafal Dawidowicz, Megan Davis, Joao Dias, Rui Figueiredo, Adrian
Gordon, Marc Hall, Wan Ching Ho, Michael Kriegel, Karin Leichtenstern, Mey Yii Lim, Sandy Louchart,
Asad Nazir, Chystopher Nehaniv, Luis Oliveira, Malcolm Padmore, Matthias Rehm, Paola Rizzo, Harald
Schaub, Tim Tisdale, Isabel Transoco, Marco Vala, Thurid Vogt, Marc Webster, and Carsten Zoll. Many

FearNot!
thanks also to Katja Berberich, Anna-Verena Zeiser, Peter Kluge und Christian Welz for their assistance with
data collection and entry.
Funding This work was partially supported by the European Community (EC) and was funded by the
eCIRCUS project IST-4-027656-STP with university partners Heriot-Watt, Hertfordshire, Sunderland,
Warwick, Bamberg, Augsburg, Wuerzburg plus INESC-ID and Interagens. The authors are solely responsible
for the content of this publication. It does not represent the opinion of the EC, and the EC is not responsible
for any use that might be made of data appearing therein.

References
Arseneault, L., Walsh, E., Trzesniewski, K., Newcombe, R., Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (2006). Bullying
victimization uniquely contributes to adjustment problems in young children: a nationally representative
cohort study. Pediatrics, 118(1), 130138.
Aylett, R. S., Louchart, S., Dias, J., Paiva, A., & Vala, M. (2005). FearNot! - an experiment in emergent
narrative. In T. Panayiotopoulos, J. Gratch, R. Aylett, D. Ballin, P. Olivier, & T. Rist (Eds.), Intelligent
virtual agents proceedings (pp. 305316). Berlin: Springer.
Bjrkqvist, K., sterman, K., & Lagerspetz, K. M. J. (1994). Sex differences in covert aggression among
adults. Aggressive Behavior, 20, 2733.
Bond, L., Carlin, J. B., Thomas, L., Rubin, K., & Patton, G. (2001). Does bullying cause emotional
problems? A prospective study of young teenagers. British Medical Journal, 323(7311), 480484.
Bryk, A. S., Raudenbush, S., & Congdon, R. (1996). HLM hierarchical linear and non-linear modeling with
HLM/2 L and HLM/3 L programs. Chicago: Scientific Software International.
Charach, A., Pepler, D., & Ziegler, S. (1995). Bullying at school: a Canadian perspective. Education Canada,
35, 1218.
Cierpka, M. (Ed.). (2001). FAUSTLOS - Ein Curriculum zur Prvention von aggressivem und gewaltbereitem
Verhalten bei Kindern der Klassen 1 bis 3 [FAUSTLOS  a curriculum to prevent aggressive and violent
behaviour among school children of classes 1 to 3]. Gttingen: Hogrefe.
Coie, J. D., Dodge, K. A., & Coppotelli, H. (1982). Dimensions and types of social status: a cross-age
perspective. Developmental Psychology, 18(4), 557570.
Coie, J. D., Dodge, K. A., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (1990). Peer group behaviours and social status. In S. R.
Asher & J. C. Coie (Eds.), Peer rejection in childhood (pp. 1759). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Craig, W. M., & Pepler, D. (1997). Observations of bullying and victimization in the schoolyard. Canadian
Journal of School Psychology, 13, 4159.
Craig, W. M., Pepler, D., & Atlas, R. (2000). Observations of bullying in the playground and in the
classroom. School Psychology International, 21, 2236.
Crick, N. R., & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995). Relational aggression, gender, and social-psychological adjustment.
Child Development, 66, 710722.
Davis, M. H. (1994). Empathy. A social psychological approach. Boulder CO: Westview.
Dewey, J. (1993). How we think: a restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to the educative process.
Lexington: Heath.
Dias, J., & Paiva, A. (2005). Feeling and reasoning: a computational model for emotional agents. Paper presented
at 12th Portuguese conference on artificial intelligence (EPIA), December 5-8, in Covilh, Portugal.
Espelage, D. L., Holt, M. K., & Henkel, R. R. (2003). Examination of peer-group contextual effects on
aggression during early adolescence. Child Development, 74, 205220.
Fekkes, M., Pijpers, F. I. M., Fredriks, A. M., Vogels, T., & Verloove-Vanhorick, S. P. (2006). Do bullied
children get ill, or do ill children get bullied? a prospective cohort study on the relationship between
bullying and health-related symptoms. Pediatrics, 117(5), 15681574.
Flavell, J. H. (2004). Theory-of-mind development: retrospect and prospect. Merrill-Palmer Quarterley
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 50, 274290.
Frey, K. S., Hirschstein, M. K., Snell, J. L., Van Schoiack Edstrom, L., MacKenzie, E. P., & Broderick, C. J.
(2005). Reducing playground bullying and supporting beliefs: an experimental trail of the steps to
respect program. Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 479491.
Hall, L., Woods, S., Aylett, R., Newall, L., & Paiva, A. (2005). Achieving empathic engagement through
affective interaction with synthetic characters. Paper presented at Affective Computing and Intelligent
Interaction (ACII), October 2224, in Beijing, China.
Hatton, N., & Smith, D. (1995). Reflection in teacher education: towards definition and implementation.
Teaching & Teacher Education, 11, 3349.

N. Vannini et al.
Hawkins, D., Pepler, D. J., & Craig, W. M. (2001). Naturalistic observations of peer interventions in
bullying. Social Development, 10, 512527.
Hazler, R. J. (1996). Bystanders: an overlooked factor in peer on peer abuse. The Journal for the
Professional Counsellor, 11(2), 1123.
Hoffman, M. L. (1977). Empathy, its development and prosocial implications. In C. B. Kaesy (Ed.),
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 25, pp. 169217). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hogan, R. (1969). Development of an empathy scale. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 35, 307316.
Hollin, C. R., & Tower, P. (Eds.). (1986). Handbook of social skill training (vols. 1 and 2). Oxford: Pergamon.
Steinmetz, M., & Holz-Ebeling, F. (1995). Wie brauchbar sind die vorliegenden Fragebogen zur Messung
von Empathie? Kritische Analyse unter Bercksichtigung der Iteminhalte. [How useful are current
questionnaires of empathy measurement? a critical analysis considering the contents of items]. Zeitschrift
fr Differentielle und Diagnostische Psychologie, 16, 1132.
Hungerige, H., & Borg-Laufs, M. (2001). Rollenspiel. [Role-play]. In M. Borg-Laufs (Ed.), Lehrbuch der
Verhaltenstherapie mit Kindern und Jugendlichen, Band II: Methoden (pp. 247299). Tbingen: dgvt.
Jeffrey, L. R., Miller, D., & Linn, M. (2001). Middle school bullying as a context for the development of
passive observers to the victimization of others. Journal of Emotional Abuse, 2, 143156.
Jupp, J. J., & Griffiths, M. D. (1990). Self-concept changes in shy, socially isolated adolescents following
social skills training emphasising role-plays. Australian Psychologist, 25, 165177.
LAbate, L., & Milan, M. A. (Eds.). (1985). Handbook of social skill training and research. New York: Wiley.
Latan, B., & Darley, J. (1968). Group inhibition of bystander intervention in emergencies. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 10, 215221.
Mayer, J. D., & Salovey, P. (1997). What is emotional intelligence? In P. Salovey & D. Sluyter (Eds.), Emotional
development and emotional intelligence: implications for educators (pp. 331). New York: Basic.
Nansel, T. R., Craig, W., Overpeck, M. D., Saluja, G., Ruan, W. J., & The Health Behaviour in School-aged
Children Bullying Analyses Working Group. (2004). Cross-national consistency in the relationship
between bullying behaviors and psychosocial adjustment. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,
158(8), 730736.
OConnell, P., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. (1999). Peer involvement in bullying: insights and challenges for
intervention. Journal of Adolescence, 22, 437452.
Olweus, D. (1996). Gewalt in der Schule [Bullying at Schools]. Bern: Huber.
Olweus, D. (2001). Peer harassment: A critical analysis and some important issues. In J. Juvonen & S. Graham (Eds.),
Peer harassment in school: The plight of the vulnerable and victimized (pp. 320). New York: Guilford.
Olweus, D. (2004). The Olweus bullying prevention programme: design and implementation issues and a
new national initiative in Norway. In P. K. Smith, D. Pepler, & K. Rigby (Eds.), Bullying in schools: how
successful can interventions be? (pp. 1336). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peery, J. (1979). Popular, amiable, isolated, rejected: a reconceptualization of sociometric status in preschool
children. Child Development, 50, 12311234.
Rigby, K., & Slee, P. T. (1992). Bullying among Australian school children: reported behaviour and attitudes
towards victims. The Journal of Social Psychology, 131(5), 615627.
Rodkin, P. C. (2004). Peer ecologies of aggression and bullying. In D. L. Espelage & S. M. Swearer (Eds.),
Bullying in American schools (pp. 87106). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salmivalli, C. (1999). Participant role approach to school bullying: implications for interventions. Journal of
Adolescence, 22, 453459.
Salmivalli, C. (2001). Group view on victimization: Empirical findings and their implications. In J. Juvonen
& S. Graham (Eds.), Peer harassment in school: The plight of the vulnerable and victimized (pp. 398
419). New York: Guilford.
Salmivalli, C., Lagerspetz, K., Bjrkqvist, K., sterman, K., & Kaukiainen, A. (1996). Bullying as a
group process: participant roles and their relations to social status within the group. Aggressive
Behavior, 22, 115.
Salmivalli, C., Lappalainen, M., & Lagerspetz, K. M. J. (1998). Stability and change of behaviour in
connection with bullying in schools: a two-year follow-up. Aggressive Behavior, 24, 205218.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., et al. (2009). Virtual learning
intervention to reduce bullying victimization in primary school: a controlled trial. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(1), 104112.
Schfer, M., & Korn, S. (2004). Bullying als Gruppenphnomen: Eine Adaption des Participant RoleAnsatzes. [Bullying as group phenomenon: an adaptation of the participant-roleapproach]. Zeitschrift
fr Entwicklungspsychologie und Pdagogische Psychologie, 36(1), 1929.
Scheithauer, H., Hayer, T., & Petermann, F. (2003). Bullying unter Schlern. Erscheinungsformen,
Risikobedingungen und Interventionskonzepte. Gttingen: [Bullying among pupils: forms, risk factors
and intervention approaches]. Hogrefe.

FearNot!
Scheithauer, H., Hayer, T., Petermann, F., & Jugert, G. (2006). Physical, verbal, and relational forms of
bullying among German students: age trends, gender differences, and correlates. Aggressive Behavior,
32, 261275.
Schreier, A., Wolke, D., Thomas, K., Horwood, J., Hollis, C., Gunnell, D., et al. (2009). Prospective study of
peer victimization in childhood and psychotic symptoms in a nonclinical population at age 12 years.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(5), 527536.
Schuster, B. (1997). Bullying in der Schule: Ein berblick ber die Forschung. und Anregungen aus
verwandten Forschungstraditionen [Bullying at school: an overview of research results and suggestions
of related research traditions]. Empirische Pdagogik, 11, 315325.
Smith, P. K., Sharp, S., Eslea, M., & Thompson, D. (2004). England: The Sheffield Project. In P. K. Smith,
D. Pepler, & K. Rigby (Eds.), Bullying in schools: How successful can interventions be? (pp. 99124).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stassen Berger, K. (2007). Update on bullying at school: science forgotten? Developmental Review, 27(1),
90126.
Sutton, J., & Smith, P. K. (1999). Bullying as a group process: an adaptation of the participant role approach.
Aggressive Behavior, 25, 97111.
Tapper, K., & Boulton, M. J. (2005). Victim and peer group responses to different forms of aggression
among primary school children. Aggressive Behavior, 31, 238253.
van de Vijver, F. J. R., & Hambleton, R. K. (1996). Translating tests: some practical guidelines. European
Psychologist, 1(2), 8999.
Van Mets, M. (1991). Rollenspiel effektiv [Effective role play]. Mnchen: Ehrenwirth.
von Mares, N., & Petermann, F. (2008). Erhebung von Bullying im Kindergarten- und Grundschulalter: Ein
Review [assessment of bullying in kindergarten and primary school age: a review]. Psychologie in
Erziehung und Unterricht, 55, 161174.
Watson, S., Vannini, N., Davis, M., Woods, S., Hall, M., Hall, L., & Dautenhahn, K. (2007). FearNot! an
anti-bullying intervention: Evaluation of an interactive virtual learning environment. Paper presented at
Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour (AISB), April 24. Newcastle, UK.
Watson, S., Vannini, N., Woods, S., Dautenhahn, K., Sapouna, M., Enz, S., et al. (2010). Inter-cultural differences
in response to a computer based anti-bullying intervention. Educational Research, 52(1), 6180.
Whitney, I., & Smith, P. K. (1993). A survey of the nature and extent of bullying in junior/middle and
secondary schools. Educational Research, 35, 325.
Wolke, D., Woods, S., Standford, K., & Schulz, H. (2001). Bullying and victimization of primary school
children in England and Germany: prevalence and school factors. British Journal of Psychology, 92(4),
673696.
Woods, S., Hall, L., Sobral, D., Dautenhahn, K., & Wolke, D.(2003). Animated characters in bullying
intervention. Paper presented at Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA), September 1517, in Irsee, Germany.
Wright, P. R. (2006). Drama education and development of self: myth or reality? Social Psychology of
Education, 9, 4365.

Natalie Vannini. Institute of Psychology, Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wuerzburg,
Roentgenring 10, D-97070 Wuerzburg. E-mail: natalie.vannini@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de; Web
site: http://www.i4.psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de/en/
Current themes of research:
Social and emotional learning (SEL). Bullying. Evaluation.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Watson, S., Vannini, N., Woods, S., Dautenhahn, K., Sapouna, M., Enz, S., Schneider, W., Wolke, D., Hall,
L., Paiva, A., Andre, E., & Aylett, R. (2010). Inter-cultural differences in response to a computer-based
anti-bullying intervention. Educational Research, 52(1), 6180.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A., Andre, E.,
Dautenhahn, K., & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying victimization in Primary
School: a controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 51(1), 104112.

N. Vannini et al.
Enz, S., Zoll, C., Vannini, N., Schneider, W., Hall, L., Paiva, A., & Aylett, R. (2008). e  Motional Learning
in Primary Schools: FearNot! An Antibullying Intervention Based on Virtual Role-play with Intelligent
Synthetic Characters. Electronic Journal e-Learning, 6(2), 111118.

Dr. Sibylle Enz. Gruppe fuer Interdisziplinaere Psychologie, Universitaet Bamberg, Kapuzinerstrasse 16, D96045 Bamberg. E-mail:sibylle.enz@uni-bamberg.de; Web: http://www.uni-bamberg.de/grip/
Current themes of research:
Empathy. Social relationships at the workplace. Social relationships with artificial companions. Evaluation.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Enz, S., Zoll, C., Vannini, N., Lim, M., Schneider, W., Hall, L., Paiva, A., Aylett, R. (2010). ORIENT: The
Intercultural Empathy Through Virtual Role-Play. In S. Mukerji & P. Tripathi (Eds.), Cases on
Transnational Learning and Technologically Enabled Environments (pp. 6588). Hershey: IGI Global.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A., Andre,
E., Dautenhahn, K., & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying victimization in
Primary School: a controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 51(1), 104112.
Ho, W.C., Dautenhahn, K., Lim, M., Enz, S., Zoll, C., & Watson, S. (2009). Towards Learning Self and
Emotional Knowledge in Social and Cultural Human-Agent Interactions. International Journal of Agent
Technologies and Systems 1(3), 5178.
Enz, S., Zoll, C., Vannini, N., Schneider, W., Hall, L., Paiva, A., & Aylett, R. (2008). e-Motional Learning in
Primary Schools: FearNot! An Antibullying Intervention Based on Virtual Role-play with Intelligent
Synthetic Characters. Electronic Journal e-Learning, 6(2), 111118.

Dr Maria Sapouna. Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL. E-mail: maria.
sapouna@scotland.gsi.gov.uk; Web site: www.warwick.ac.uk
Current themes of research:
Bullying. Offender rehabilitation and resettlement.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A., Andre,
E., Dautenhahn, K. & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying victimization in
primary school: A controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(1), 104112.
Sapouna, M. (in press). Collective efficacy in the school context: Does it help explain victimisation and
bullying among Greek primary and secondary school students? Journal of Interpersonal Violence.
Sapouna, M. (2008). Bullying in Greek primary and secondary schools. School Psychology International, 29
(2), 199213.

Dieter Wolke. Professor of Developmental Psychology and Individual Differences, The University of
Warwick, Department of Psychology and Health Sciences Research Institute, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
E-mail: D.Wolke@warwick.ac.uk; Web site: http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/psych/people/academic/
dwolke/, http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/?external
Current themes of research:
Development and consequences of childhood bullying and social defeat. Precursors and consequences of
early regulatory problems in infancy. Early brain development (natural experiment prematurity) and longterm consequences on cognitive development and psychopathology.

FearNot!
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Schreier, A., Wolke, D., Thomas, K., Horwood, J., Hollis, C., Gunnell, D., et al. (2009). Prospective Study of
Peer Victimization in Childhood and Psychotic Symptoms in a Nonclinical Population at Age 12 Years.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 66(5), 527536.
Wolke, D., Woods, S., & Samara, M. (2009). Who escapes or remains a victim of bullying in primary
school? British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 27, 835851.
Johnson, S., Hollis, C., Kochhar, P., Hennessy, E., Wolke, D., & Marlow, N. (2010). Psychiatric Disorders in
Extremely Preterm Children: Longitudinal Finding at Age 11 Years in the EPICure Study. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49(5), 453463.e451.
Wolke, D., Samara, M., Bracewell, M., & Marlow, N. (2008). Specific Language Difficulties and School
Achievement in Children Born at 25 Weeks of Gestation or Less. The Journal of Pediatrics, 152(2),
256262.e251.
Wolke, D., Schmid, G., Schreier, A., & Meyer, R. (2009). Crying and Feeding Problems in Infancy and
Cognitive Outcome in Preschool Children Born at Risk: A Prospective Population Study. Journal of
Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics, 30(3), 226238.

Scott Watson. Adaptive Systems Research Group, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, Hatfield,
Hertfordshire, AL10 9AB, UK. Web site: http://adapsys.feis.herts.ac.uk/
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Watson, S., Vannini, N., Woods, S., Dautenhahn, K., Sapouna, M., Enz, S., Schneider, W., Wolke, D., Hall,
L., Paiva, A., Andre, E., & Aylett, R. (2010). Inter-cultural differences in response to a computer-based
anti-bullying intervention. Educational Research, 52(1), 6180.
Watson, S., Dautenhahn, K., Ho; W.C., & Dawidowicz, R. (2009). Developing relationships between
autonomous agents: Promoting pro-social behaviour through virtual learning environments Part I. In G.
Trajkovski, & S.G. Collins (Eds.). Handbook of Research on Agent Based Societies. Information
Reference Science. pp 125138.
Watson, S., Dautenhahn, K., Ho, W. C., & Dawidowicz, R. (2009). Developing relationships between
autonomous agents: Promoting pro-social behaviour through virtual learning environments Part II In G.
Trajkovski, & S.G. Collins (Eds.). Handbook of Research on Agent Based Societies. Information
Reference Science. pp 229242.

Dr Sarah Woods. School of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, Hatfield, Herts, AL10
9AB, UK. E-mail: s.n.woods@herts.ac.uk; Web site: www.go.herts.ac.uk/psychology
Current themes of research:
Bullying Behaviour. Friendship. Peer Relations. Cyberbullying. Online Relationships & Disclosure. RolePlay & Individual Differences.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Woods, S., & Wolke, D. (2004). Direct and relational bullying experiences among primary school children,
and academic achievement. Journal of School Psychology, 42(2), 135155.
Woods, S., & Wolke, D. (2003). Does the content of anti-bullying policies inform us about the prevalence of
direct and relational bullying behaviour in primary schools? Educational Psychology, 23(4), 381
401.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S. Hall, L., Paiva, A.,
Andre, E., Dautenhahn, K., Aylett., R. (2009) Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying
victimization in primary school: A controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 51(1),
104112.
Wolke, D., Woods, S., Samara, M., (2009). Who escapes or remains a victim of bullying in primary school?
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 27, 835851.

N. Vannini et al.
Prof. Dr. Kerstin Dautenhahn. Adaptive Systems Research Group, School of Computer Science, University
of Hertfordshire, College Lane, Hatfield Herts AL10 9AB, United Kingdom. Web site: http://homepages.
feis.herts.ac.uk/comqkd/
Current themes of research:
Humanrobot interaction. Social robotics. Assistive technology. Intelligent virtual environments.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Watson, S., Vannini, N., Woods, S., Dautenhahn, K., Sapouna, M., Enz, S., Schneider, W., Wolke, D., Hall,
L., Paiva, A., Andre, E., & Aylett, R. (2010). Inter-cultural differences in response to a computer-based
anti-bullying intervention. Educational Research, 52(1), 6180.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A.,
Andre, E., Dautenhahn, K. & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying
victimization in primary school: A controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(1),
104112.
Woods, S., Hall, L., Dautenhahn, K., & Wolke, D. (2007). Implications of gender differences for the
development of animated characters for the study of bullying behavior, Computers in Human Behavior
23(1), 770786.
Robins, B., Dautenhahn, K., & Dubowski, J. (2006). Does appearance matter in the interaction of children
with autism with a humanoid robot? Interaction Studies 7(3), 509542.

Dr Lynne Hall. Department of Computing, Engineering and Technology, University of Sunderland, St.
Peter's Campus, Sunderland, SR6 0DD, UK. E-mail: lynne.hall@sunderland.ac.uk; Web site: www.
sunderland.ac.uk
Current themes of research:
In context evaluation for technology enhanced learning. User experience design and evaluation for low
carbon vehicles.

Prof. Dr. Ana Paiva. Associate Professor at IST (Instituto Superior Tcnico) and Group Coordinator at
INESC-ID (Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores  Investigao e Desenvolvimento em
Lisboa), IST Taguspark, Av. Prof. Dr. Cavaco Silva, 2744-016, Porto Salvo, Oeiras, Portugal. E-mail:
ana.paiva@inesc-id.pt; Web site: http://www.inesc-id.pt/
Current themes of research:
Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Agents. Synthetic characters. Affective interactions. Emotion based
architectures for intelligent agents.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Prada, R., & Paiva, A. (2009). Teaming up humans with autonomous synthetic characters. Artificial
Intelligence,173, 80103.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A., Andre,
E., Dautenhahn, K. & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying victimization in
primary school: A controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(1), 104112.
Paiva, A., Dias, J., Sobral, D., Aylett, R., Woods, S., Hall, L., & Zoll, C. (2005). Learning By Feeling:
Evoking Empathy With Synthetic Characters. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 19, 235266.

FearNot!
Prof. Dr. Elisabeth Andr. Lehrstuhl fr Multimedia-Konzepte und Anwendungen, Institut fr Informatik,
Universitaet Augsburg, Universitaetsstr. 6a, D-86159 Augsburg, Germany. E-mail: andre@informatik.
uni-augsburg.de; Web site: http://mm-werkstatt.informatik.uni-augsburg.de
Current themes of research:
Experimental learning environments with animated characters. Computer-based role play. Serious games and
edutainment. Intelligent tutoring systems. Affective computing. Interactive multimodal user interfaces.
Human-centred multimedia.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Andr, E. (2008). Design and Evaluation of Embodied Conversational Agents for Educational and Advisory
Software. In R. Luppicini (ed). Handbook of Conversation Design for Instructional Applications.
Information Science Reference.
Leichtenstern, K., & Andr, E. (2009). Studying multi-user settings for pervasive games. In: MobileHCI 09
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Human- Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices
and Services, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2009) 110.
Johnson, L., Mayer, R., Andr, E., & Rehm, M. (2005). Cross-cultural evaluation of politeness in tactics for
pedagogical agents. In: Proc. of the 12th Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED).
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A.,
Andre, E., Dautenhahn, K. & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying
victimization in primary school: A controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(1),
104112.

Prof. Dr. Ruth Aylett. MACS, Heriot-Watt University, Riccarton, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK. E-mail:
ruth@macs.hw.ac.uk; Web site: www.macs.hw.ac.uk/ruth
Current themes of research:
Affective agent architectures. Interactive narrative. Humanrobot interaction.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Aylett, R., Paiva, A., Vannini, N., Enz, S., & Andre, E. (2009). But that was in another country: agents and
intercultural empathy. Proceedings, 8th International conference, AAMAS 2009, vol 1, 329336.
Lim, M. Y., & Aylett, R. (2009). An emergent emotion model for an affective mobile guide with attitude,
Applied Artificial Intelligence Journal, 2, 835854.
Sapouna, M., Wolke, D., Vannini, N., Watson, S., Woods, S., Schneider, W., Enz, S., Hall, L., Paiva, A.,
Andre, E., Dautenhahn, K. & Aylett, R. (2009). Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying
victimization in primary school: A controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(1),
104112.

Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Schneider. Institute of Psychology, Department of Educational Psychology, University
of Wuerzburg, Roentgenring 10, D-97070 Wuerzburg. E-mail: schneider@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.
de; Web site: http://www.i4.psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de/en/
Current themes of research:
Memory Development, Metacognition. Reading Research. Prevention of Developmental Dyslexia.
Developmental Dyslexia vs. Garden Variety Poor Readers. Media Psychology. The Influence of
Televsision on the Development of Language and Reading Competence.

N. Vannini et al.
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education:
Schneider, W., Stefanek, J., & Niklas, F. (2009). Development of intelligence and thinking. In W. Schneider
& M. Bullock (Eds.), Human development from early childhood to early adulthood: Evidence from the
Munich Longitudinal Study on the Genesis of Individual Competencies (LOGIC) (pp. 734). New York,
NY: Psychology.
Schneider, W. (2008). The development of metacognitive knowledge in children and adolescents: Major
trends and implications for education. Mind, Brain, and Education, 2, 114121.
Ennemoser, M. & Schneider, W. (2007). Relations of television viewing and reading: Findings from a 4-year
longitudinal study.Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 349368.
Schneider, W., Lockl, K. & Fernandez, O. (2005). Interrelationships among theory of mind, executive
control, language development, and working memory in young children: A longitudinal analysis. In W.
Schneider, R. Schumann-Hengsteler, & B. Sodian (Eds.), Young children's cognitive development:
Interrelations among executive functioning, working memory, verbal ability, and theory of mind (pp.
259284).Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schneider, W., Wolke, D., Schlagmller, M. & Meyer, R. (2004). Pathways to school achievement in very
preterm and full-term children: The Bavarian Longitudinal Study. European Journal of Psychology in
Education, 19, 385406.

View publication stats

