See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301835912

A Bayesian belief network model for community-based coastal resource
management in the Kei Islands, Indonesia
Article in ECOLOGY AND SOCIETY  June 2016
DOI: 10.5751/ES-08285-210216

CITATIONS

READS

19

293

5 authors, including:
Eriko Hoshino

Ingrid van putten

CSIRO Marine And Atmospheric Research

The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation

35 PUBLICATIONS 757 CITATIONS

157 PUBLICATIONS 3,694 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Wardis Girsang

Budy Resosudarmo

Pattimura University

Australian National University

54 PUBLICATIONS 90 CITATIONS

191 PUBLICATIONS 2,272 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Impact of COVID-19 on Bhutanese aquaculture sector. View project

Climate Change View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Satoshi Yamazaki on 11 May 2016.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Copyright  2016 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Hoshino, E., I. van Putten, W. Girsang, B. P. Resosudarmo, and S. Yamazaki. 2016. A Bayesian belief network model for communitybased coastal resource management in the Kei Islands, Indonesia. Ecology and Society 21(2):16. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/
ES-08285-210216

Research

A Bayesian belief network model for community-based coastal resource
management in the Kei Islands, Indonesia
Eriko Hoshino 1,2, Ingrid van Putten 1,3, Wardis Girsang 4, Budy P. Resosudarmo 5 and Satoshi Yamazaki 2,3
ABSTRACT. Understanding the specific relationships between ecological and socioeconomic conditions and marine tenure is likely
to contribute to successful functioning of self-governance institutions for common-pool resources. Complex interrelationships of factors
influencing fishing activities of coastal communities and implementation of customary marine tenure over their waters can be
represented in a Bayesian belief network model. We developed a Bayesian belief network model that includes the links between factors
for fishing communities in the Kei Islands in Indonesia, based on indepth local surveys. Our results showed that the cumulative impacts
of multiple factors on key social, economic, and environmental outcomes can be much larger than the impact from a single source,
which implies that management or policy intervention could be more effective when addressing multiple factors simultaneously. The
local community's perception of fish stock abundance trends was the single most important factor influencing social, economic, and
environmental outcomes of their community-based management system. The frequency of which outsiders were sighted in territorial
waters was strongly (negatively) linked to weak or strong implementation of a customary tenure (Sasi) and the occurrence of intervillage
and intravillage conflict. Ecological variables also drive these conflicts, which illustrates the close connection between ecological and
social outcomes, and the importance of considering social-ecological systems as a whole.
Key Words: Bayesian belief network; community-based management; customary marine tenure; Indonesia; small-scale fisheries; socialecological systems
INTRODUCTION
Marine and coastal resources in many parts of the world have
been managed traditionally by community-based governance
systems that involve ownerships or property rights, commonly
referred to as customary marine tenure (CMT). Customary
marine tenure provides a vehicle by which state agencies and
customary stakeholders may work in partnership to share
authority of, and responsibility for, resource management, in what
is termed cooperative management or comanagement (Cooke et
al. 2000). Customary tenure regimes are the foundation of marine
governance in much of the Pacific and have been documented
throughout the world (Cinner 2005, Aswani et al. 2013). In
response to degradation of many inshore marine resources, CMTs
and traditional community-based resource management have
attracted great attention as cost-effective, decentralized ways of
managing coastal fisheries (Hviding 1998, Ruddle 1998). The
viability of conservation strategies built on a foundation of
marine tenure, however, remains ambiguous, as it is unclear
whether marine tenure systems can withstand the profound
economic development that much of the coastal states in the
developing world are facing. A large body of literature has
attempted to identify conditions that are important to successful
functioning of self-governance institutions for common-pool
resources (Cox et al. 2010, Pollnac et al. 2010). Studies specific to
CMT have suggested that social and economic factors, such as
poverty, dependency on resources, and human population size,
affect the nature and functioning of marine tenure; however,
specific relationships between socioeconomic conditions and
marine tenure are still not well understood (Cinner 2005, Cinner
et al. 2012b). There has been little discussion that specifically
1

focuses on interdependencies between factors that affect marine
resource management under a CMT arrangement.
In this article, we develop a Bayesian belief network (BBN) model
that represents complex interrelationships of factors that
influence small-scale fishing communities and implementation of
customary management over their waters, and demonstrate the
usefulness of the tool to identify the relative importance of factors
to achieve social, economic, and environmental objectives.
Bayesian belief networks are graphical models that represent a
set of variables connected by directed, acyclic graphs which can
be used to explore and display causal relationships between
factors and assess the influences of each input variable on the
output variables based on Bayesian principles. Bayesian belief
networks have the ability to incorporate different types and
sources of data, such as quantitative data, expert or local
knowledge, and outputs from other models, and are capable of
dealing with missing or incomplete data (Korb and Nicholson
2011). Such features make them well suited for small-scale
fisheries where availability of quantitative data is often limited.
A number of BBNs have been developed to aid natural resource
management decisions, including fisheries (Varis and Kuikka
1997, Kuikka et al. 1999, Little et al. 2004, Haapasaari and
Karjalainen 2010, Levontin et al. 2011, van Putten et al. 2013).
The importance of integrating biological, economic, and
sociological information into fisheries management plans was
illustrated by Levontin et al. (2011), who highlighted the link
between commitment and management success. Most of the
existing applications of BBNs are in industrial-scale fisheries,
with limited application in small-scale fisheries. One notable

CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS, Australia, 2Tasmanian School of Business and Economics, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS,
Australia, 3Centre for Marine Socioecology, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia, 4Faculty of Agriculture, University of Pattimura,
Ambon, Indonesia, 5Indonesia Project, Arndt-Corden Department of Economics, Crawford School of Public Policy, Australian National University,
ACT, Australia

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

exception is van Putten et al. (2013), who applied a BBN to
investigate the factors affecting the participation of indigenous
fishers under key economic and socio-cultural drivers, such as
presence or absence of a government employment program. To
the best of our knowledge, BBN has not been applied to assess
the factors affecting small-scale fisheries under a CMT or
comanagement setting.
The Kei Islands, which are part of the Southeast Maluku Province
in Indonesia, have well-established tenure systems where coastal
resources have been communally owned and managed by Sasi, a
set of traditional laws governing natural resources uses, including
the spatial and temporal closure of fields, forests, reefs, and fishing
grounds (Thorburn 2001). Our aim is to develop a BBN for the
Kei Islands to gain understanding of the nature of
interrelationships between various factors that influence smallscale fisheries, whose fishery resource is managed under a CMT
regime (Sasi, in this case), and livelihoods of coastal communities;
i.e., the social, economic, and environmental outcomes of their
fishing activities. The model developed can provide a practical
tool to guide resource managers and policy-makers to identify
priorities and/or points of intervention for sustainable coastal
resource management.
METHODS
Study site
Indonesia is the largest archipelago country in the world, with a
population of approximately 250 million people. The study site
is in the Kei Islands, a group of islands in the southeast part of
Maluku in Indonesia (Fig. 1). In 2007, the Kei Islands separated
into two districts: Kota Tual and Maluku Tenggara. The total
population of the Kei Islands (Kota Tual and Maluku Tenggara
districts combined) is approximately 162,000 (Badan Pusat
Statistik 2014a, b).
Fig. 1. General location of the Kei Islands (main islands) and
study sites at the subdistrict level. Source: Southeast Maluku
Regional Development Planning Agency (2012).

and topshell (Trochus niloticus, called Lola by locals) exports
providing cash income. Other marine-based small-scale
industries, such as seaweed and pearl cultivation, also provide
important livelihoods. The Kei Islands are known as the center
of cultural and marine tourism in the Maluku Province, as Kei
society maintains many cultural traditions, and tropical coral
reefs are located around the islands. Fishing activities around the
Kei Islands are mostly artisanal. The most common species
caught in the area include small tuna (komu), coral cod (kerapu),
mackerel (kawalinya), scad (momar), bluefin trevally (bubara),
ornate emperor (sikuda), and anchovy (puri).
For a long time, daily activities of the people in Kei have been
organized by a system of traditional rules that is called Larwul
Ngabal. One aspect of these traditional rules is Sasi. The goals
of implementing Sasi in Kei are: (1) to manage harmony in social
relationship, particularly between women and men; and (2) to
manage natural resources and the environment. However,
particularly since the 2000 decentralization era, there has been
misinterpretation of Sasi by village leaders or certain communal
groups driven by their own social, cultural, economic, and
political motivation (based on the interviews in this study and in
Adhuri 2013).
Rules for marine Sasi differ in the various villages in the Kei
Islands. Some villages enact Sasi on the intertidal zone (meti),
alternately closing portions of the coastal zone to allow reef
organisms to replenish, while some villages in Kei close their entire
meti for several weeks prior to the annual neap tide that occurs
in September and October (Thorburn 2000). There are also
examples of Sasi where certain areas are closed during spawning
seasons for certain locally important fish species or to allow fry
to attain optimal size before harvest (Nikijuluw 1994, Thorburn
2000). While some villages in other parts of Maluku use Sasi to
restrict fishing gear types (Nikijuluw 1994), Sasi laut in the Kei
Islands are generally area and/or species specific. In other words,
the Sasi is applied to protect specific areas or certain valuable
commodities, such as sea cucumber and topshell (Mosse et al.
2012). There are also some examples from villages in other parts
of Maluku Province where Sasi laut is applied to small pelagic
species (Nikijuluw 1994).
The heads of the villages typically lead the implementation of
Sasi in their village, while the task of monitoring Sasi
implementation relies on all village members. Breaking Sasi rules
should be reported by village members to the head of their village.
Those who break Sasi rule, or those who notice another person
breaking the rules but who do not report the case, are punished
by the head of village according to local customary rules. More
examples of Sasi practices in the Kei Islands and Maluku Province
are provides in Adhuri (2013), Novaczek et al. (2001), and Ruttan
(1998).

The people of the Kei Islands come from diverse ethnic and
religious backgrounds. Kei's local economy is a mixture of
subsistence agriculture and fishing, with copra (dried coconuts)

Survey
Household and village leader surveys were conducted in four
fishery villages in two subdistrictsKei Kecil and Dullah Utara
between November and December 2013. Prior to the surveys,
site visits were carried out by the research team members in order
to identify main stakeholder groups in the region, as well as to
develop and pretest the survey questionnaire in consultation with
local experts in fisheries and Sasi. The experts included key
personnel at the local technical/research institution (Tual State

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

Fisheries Politechnic), researchers at the University of Pattimura
in Ambon, and local government officers responsible for fisheries.
A total of 296 randomly selected households were interviewed
using a structured questionnaire. The interviews focused on
individuals in a household who spent most of their time on fishing
activities ("main fisher"). The selected villages were known to have
a high concentration of fishers, and were located close to the coast.
The questionnaire consisted of seven sections. The first three
sections focused on the characteristics of the fishing operation,
such as years of fishing operation, average catch per trip over the
last 12 months, fishing gears used and ownership of the gears,
number of paid employees on board, cost of fishing, and whether
the fishers felt that the catch amount had changed during the last
12 months. The next two sections of the survey contained a series
of questions about fisheries management, including customary
management practices (Sasi laut). Examples of questions
included the following: "Is there an area where fishing is
temporarily prohibited as a practice of Sasi laut in your fishing
area?", "In which months is fishing prohibited in your area?",
"Which species are prohibited to be caught under the rules of Sasi
laut?", and "Who needs to comply with the rules of Sasi laut?."
The last two sections of the survey were comprised of questions
concerning perceived states of their fishing grounds, including
habitat condition or quality and current fish abundance trends,
and questions regarding social structures, such as whether the
respondent maintains a good relationship with other fishers,
village or cultural leaders, and government fishery officers, and
whether they are engaged in conflicts. Some demographic
information was also collected in this section of the
questionnaire.
The interviews were undertaken by local researchers from the
University of Pattimura, all of whom attended training and
information sessions. Demographic information for survey
respondents, and fishing operation details (e.g., fishing gear used)
for the sampled villages are summarized in Table 1. Most (67.8%)
survey respondents were small-scale operators with no more than
four people on board per fishing trip (Table 1). There was a wide
variability in the duration and timing of their fishing season. The
duration of the most productive months for fishing was perceived
to range from 3 months to 12 months. Most fishers went on daily
fishing trips throughout the fishing season (average 6.2 days per
week), but spent less than 3 days per week fishing during less
productive seasons (Table 1). Fishers used a variety of fishing
gears, including lift nets (bagan), fish aggregation devices
(rumpon), small purse seine nets (pukat cincin), gill nets (jaring),
hand lines (pancing), and fish traps (bubu). Self-reported catch
per fishing trip (i.e., catch per unit effort [CPUE]) also varied
widely, ranging from zero to more than 10 tonnes, due to different
characteristics of species caught and type of gear used. The
extremely large catch was typically attributed to larger operators
who used lift nets or fish aggregation devices combined with purse
seine nets, and where more than 15 employees were on board.
However, a few small-scale operators ( four people) also reported
large catches of pelagic species of more than 5 tonnes per trip.
For reasons of confidentiality, it was not possible to disclose the
names of the sampled villages or show their exact locations, but
the locations of the study sites at the subdistrict level (Dullah
Utara and Kei Kecil) are given in Fig. 1.

Table 1. Summary of demographics and fishing operations.
Demographic
Age (years old)
Gender
Formal school education
(years)
Ethnic
Religion

Between 15 and 80; mean 38.7 years
old
Male (294), female (2)
0 to 17; mean 9 years
Bugis (5%), Buton (17.0%), Kei (67%),
others (11%)
Islam (91.3%), Catholic (8.7%)

Fishing operations
Major fishing gear used
Types of boat used

Bagan (41.2%), rumpon (7.8%)
Traditional boat (60.1%), long boat
(16.6%), speed boat (31.1%)
Fishing seasons (most
Min 3 months (MarchMay) to max
productive months)
12 months
Number of paid employees 14 people (67.8%), 59 people
on board
(16.6%), 1014 people (3.0%), < 15
people (12.5%); mean 5.3 people
Average fishing days per
Fishing season (6.2 days), nonfishing
week
season (2.8 days)
Average fishing hours per
Fishing season (11.4 hours), nonfishing
trip
season (5.7 hours)
Mean and median catch per Mean (138 kg/trip), median (70 kg/
fishing trip for coastal
trip)
nonpelagic species

Bayesian belief network model
The BBN modeling procedure consists of three steps: (1) identify
the nodes representing system variables, such as those related to
the environment (e.g., habitat quality and fish abundance trends),
external stressors (e.g., presence of agriculture and population
growth), and management systems (e.g., Sasi strength, and the
presence of area/seasonal closures). Each variable can either be
discrete or continuous and has a finite set of mutually exclusive
states (e.g., high/low, present/absent); (2) create links representing
causal relationships between these nodes (from parent node to
child node; i.e., from cause to effect); and (3) generate probabilities
attached to each node to quantify the relationships between
connected links. The BBN we developed is based on multiple data
sources, where key variables and causal links between different
variables were identified through literature reviews, household
and village leader surveys, and expert knowledge. Netica software
was used to build the BBN and provide a sensitivity analysis by
calculating the entropy and variance reduction scores to identify
those parts of the model that most affect the output variables.
In the BBN, causal links represent the relationship between nodes
using conditional probability tables (CPTs). For example, high
fish abundance will increase the likelihood of catch per unit effort
being high. These causal relationships influence the likelihood of
outcome states of the variables of interest depicted in the BBN
(Ticehurst et al. 2007). Conditional probabilities were generated
mostly from the data obtained from the household surveys. Netica
calculates CPTs based on Bayes theorem, whereby new
information that becomes available revises the prior probability,
which is then used to calculate the likelihood that the linked
variables of interest are in particular states (referred to as
posterior probability). It is not necessary to have questionnaires

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

that explicitly ask cause and effects among selected variables, as
Bayes theorem allows derivation of conditional probabilities from
independent sets of events. For example, hypothetically, if 51%
of a population is male, the probability of randomly selecting an
adult for a survey and getting a male is given by P(M) = 0.51. If
it is also known that 9.5% of males own a boat, whereas only 1.7%
of females own a boat, Bayes theorem indicates that the
conditional probability that the respondent who is male given that
the person owns a boat can be calculated as follows:

|

=




|

|
+



|

(1)

where P(F) is the probability of selecting female (0.49 in this
example), P(B|M) is the probability of getting someone who
owns a boat, given that the person is a male (0.095), and P(B|F)
is the probability of getting someone who owns a boat, given that
the person is a female (0.017). After learning that the subject owns
a boat, the probability is revised to be 0.853.
When there was insufficient information on the probability
distribution of events to populate CPTs from survey data, the
CPTs in our research were either generated based on expert
judgment (e.g., discussion with local scholars, fisheries managers,
and village leaders), where feasible, or were given very simple
scenarios (e.g., low/high) that were assigned equal probabilities
(termed uninformative prior) when uncertainty was high. In the
cases of expert judgment, a range of plausible alternative values
was considered, and the resulting posterior probability
distribution was also given a range (Table 2). For example, if
sanctions are weak and no formal monitoring system is in place,
the probability of having strong enforcement was considered to
be very small, and probabilities of between 90% and 100% were
assigned. Prior to construction of a full BBN model, a submodel
was constructed for an initial exploration of important variables,
in order to limit the number of variables included in the full model.
A drawback of using BBNs is that a CPT grows exponentially
with the number of parents nodes, which quickly makes a network
intractable and uninformative.

small-scale operators, the scenario analysis related to CPUE was
examined for small-scale operators with up to four people on
board (covering 67.8% of survey respondents). CPUE is generally
much higher for pelagic species than for coastal species, and
because our main interest was the small-scale operators and
because Sasi is applied to nearshore coastal areas, the catch of
the six most common pelagic species was excluded from CPUE.
The excluded species were anchovies (puri), bigeye scad
(kawalinya), small-tuna (koma), sardine (tembang), scad mackerel
(momar), and Indian mackerel (lemma). A large proportion of
these pelagic species is caught in water greater than 100 m in depth,
although anchovies are caught mainly in relatively shallow water
of about 1015 m depth. Examples of coastal species included in
CPUE are bluefin trevally (bubara), ornate emperor (sikuda),
grouper or coral cod (kerapu), squid (cumi), snapper-like species
(kakap merah, tenggiri, baronang), parrot fish (kakakutua), and
small reef fishes, such as fusilier (lalosi).
A sensitivity analysis was carried out to evaluate the influence of
each node on the social (conflict), economic (CPUE), and
environmental (future fish abundance) indicators for each
subdistrict. A sensitivity analysis allows the effective
determination of how much a finding at one node in the BBN
will likely change the probability outcome of another node (van
Putten et al. 2013). Netica's measures for entropy reduction (for
categorical variables) and variance reduction (for continuous
variables) were applied as described in Marcot et al. (2006). The
reduction scores were used to rank the factors from most to least
important in terms of impacts on the node of interest. Larger
variance reduction values indicate more influence. For example,
fishing pressure (entropy reduction = 0.15) has a far greater
influence on the status of future fish abundance than the current
perceived fish abundance trend (entropy reduction = 0.01).

One notable restriction of applying a standard BBN to socialecological systems is that it does not allow for feedback loops to
be represented in the model due to the mathematical properties
of the joint probability distribution. This limitation can be
overcome by including dynamic variables that represent two or
more points in time that indirectly account for feedback between
the current states and the future (Yu et al. 2004). The variables
related to fish stock abundance at two points in time ("Current
abundance trend" and "Future fish abundance") were included to
account for feedback effects of the current states to the future
without creating a loop.

A common technique for validating BBNs is simply to ask the
experts whether they agree with the model structure,
discretization, and parameterization (Korb and Nicholson 2011).
Another common validating test is to use sensitivity analysis
(entropy/variance reduction scores). We used both sensitivity
analyses and discussion with local scholars to explore alternative
model structure. In order to test how sensitive the resulting
posterior distributions of the key network variables were to the
underlying assumptions made in the fixed (prior) distributions of
the network, sensitivity tests were undertaken by altering the
values of the priors between a low and high value. The resulting
posterior probability was also given as a range in these cases. A
workshop involving key stakeholder groups was organized in
November 2015 to present our model results and obtain feedback
to further improve/validate our model, although at the time of
writing, such a meeting was still pending and it was not possible
to include additional feedback in the results. The present model
can benefit from inputs from additional stakeholder meetings.

Three performance indicators representing economic, social, and
environmental objectives of Sasi laut were considered: CPUE,
conflicts, and future fish abundance, respectively. For each
indicator, we considered scenarios where the values of major
linked variables were changed to the extreme; for instance,
changing the perception of habitat quality being damaged from
43.7% (base case) to 100% to see how these changes affected the
indicator values. Since our main interest was on the influence on

RESULTS
The variable names selected in the full BBN, and their base case
states generated from the model, are shown in Table 2. The
preliminary analysis using a submodel showed that most of the
demographic factors (age, ethnic, religion, years of education),
and some of the management-related variables (e.g., whether the
rules of Sasi laut are written, who complies with Sasi laut) had
little effect on the probability outcomes of the performance

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

Table 2. Variables included in the final Bayesian belief network, definition, and base case states generated from the model.
Variable names
Demographic
Subdistrict
Alternative job
External stressors
Aquaculture
Deforestation
Population growth
Tourism
Urbanization
Environment
Habitat quality
Current abundance trend
Future fish abundance
Fishing
Catch per unit effort (CPUE) coastal
Catch trend
Num of paid employee
Fishing gear

Definition/Base case states (% indicates posterior probability)
Subdistrict where respondent resides: Kei Kecil (68.5%), Dullah Utara (31.5%)
Alternative job opportunity other than fishing available over the last 12 months for respondent: present
(54.7%), absent (45.3%)
Not affected (52.9%), affected little (34.1%), highly affected (12.9%)
Not affected (60.7%), affected little (31.1%), highly affected (8.2%)
Not affected (49.7%), affected little (46.0%), highly affected (4.3%)
Not affected (81.8%), affected little (16.2%), highly affected (2.0%)
Not affected (66.1%), affected little (29.1%), highly affected (4.8%)
Perceived habitat quality of the respondents fishing grounds: improved (22.6%), unchanged (35.8%),
damaged (41.6%)
Perceived current fish abundance trend at respondents fishing grounds: up (23.0%), unchanged (27.2%),
down (49.9%)
Low (48.562.7%), high (37.351.5%)
Average catch (kg) per trip excluding pelagic species over the last 12 months: low (099 kg, 47.5%),
medium (100200 kg, 26.2%), high (200 kg, 26.3%)
Perceived catch trend at respondents fishing grounds: up (19.6%), unchanged (36.6%), down (43.8%)
Number of paid employee on board: 04 (67.3%), 59 (16.7%), 1014 (3.3%), > 15 (12.7%)
Whether the respondents have modernized their fishing gear over the last 12 months: modernized
(32.6%), unchanged (67.4%)
Percentage of fishing gear owned by the respondents: 033 (39.4%), 3465 (19.4%), 66100 (40.8%)
Cost of fishing per trip (Rp000 per trip): low (<Rp500k, 77.1%), medium to high (>Rp500k, 22.9%)
Low (47.753.1%), High (46.952.3%)

% Gear own
Cost
Fishing pressure
Customary marine tenure (CMT) (Sasi
laut)
Sasi strength
Whether the respondents perceive that the strength of Sasi has changed over time: weakened/disappeared
(92.8%), unchanged (3.0%), strengthened (4.3%)
Area closure
Sea area closure in the villages territorial waters: present (86.3%), absent (13.7%)
% seasonal closure
Percentage of year closed by Sasi laut: 09 (90.4%), 1049 (1.3%), 50100(8.3%)
Num of species protected
Number of species protected by Sasi laut, such as Lola, Tripang (sea cucumber), and Lainnya: 01
species (0.7%), 12 species (64.1%), 23 species (35.2%)
Fine_money
Presence of fine in terms of money when an offense is found: yes (6.4%), no (93.6%)
Fine_goods
Presence of fine in terms of goods when an offense is found: yes (1.5%), no (98.5%)
Suspension
Whether the offender will be suspended from fishing activities: yes (6.4%), no (93.6%)
Exclusion
Whether the offender will be excluded from the village: yes (1.0%), no (99.0%)
Enforcement
Strength of enforcement (combined effect of monitoring and sanction): weak (84.796.4%), strong (3.6
15.3%)
Sanction
Strength of sanction, based on the presence of fine, suspension, and exclusion above: weak (89.391.3%),
strong (9.710.7%)
Sasi implementation
Combined effects of area closure, seasonal closure, and species protection: weak (58.574.6%), strong
(25.441.5%)
Monitoring
Monitoring of infringement: yes (50%), no (50%)
Social
Intervillage conflict
Presence of intervillage conflict: present (30.6%), absent (69.4%)
Intravillage conflict
Presence of intravillage conflict: present (30.1%), absent (69.9%)
Village leader relation
Relationship with a village leader: good (98.3%), not good (1.7%)
Fishery officer relation
Relationship with fishery officers: good (64.5%), not good (35.5%)
Outsiders
Sighting of outsiders fishing in their sea territory: present (47.2%), absent (52.8%)
 indicates the variables where conditional probability tables were generated from expert judgment or were given a very simple scenario (e.g., low/high)
that was assigned equal probabilities due to lack of information. The resulting base case posterior probability distribution is also given a range.

indicators and their entropy/variance reduction scores. As a
result, they were excluded from the full model. The final BBN
contained 34 nodes and 55 links, which generated 2827
conditional probabilities. The scenarios that tested the influence
of changes in key variables on the performance indicators values
are given in Table 3. The percentages indicate posterior probability
distributions conditional on the linkages of variables included in
the BBN (Fig. 2).

CPUE is an important indicator of economic productivity, as
high CPUE suggests more fish are caught given the same amount
of input. CPUE for coastal species ranges widely from zero to
920 kg/trip, with median 70 kg/trip and mean 138 kg/trip. Low
CPUE in this study refers to catch less than 100 kg/trip based on
the mean value as well as examples from similar tropical reef
fisheries in southeast Asia (Viswanathan et al. 2001, Liese et al.
2007). The base case results suggest that the probability of a low

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

Table 3. Scenarios considered and resulting posterior probability distribution (%) of economic, social, and environmental performance
indicators.
Scenarios

Economic
Catch per unit effort
(CPUE)

Social
(Intravillage conflict)

Social
(Intervillage conflict)

Environmental
(Future fish stock abundance)

Base case

Low (52.1%); med
(25.3%); high (22.5%)
Low (41.7%); med
(29.3%); high (28.9%)
Down: low (42.3%); med
(30.7%); high (22.6%)

Absent (69.4%); present
(30.6%)
Absent (69.0%); present
(31.0%)
Down: absent (74.1%),
present (25.9%); Up:
absent (72.3%); present
(27.3%)
Absent (66.6%); present
(33.4%)
Absent (73.3%); present
(26.7%)
Absent (75.8%); present
(24.2%)
Absent (73.7%); present
(26.3%)
Absent (83.6%); present
(16.4%)
Absent (70.0%); present
(30.0%)
Absent (70.0%); present
(30.0%)
Absent (49.7%); present
(50.3%)
Absent (64.7%); present
(35.3%)
Absent (49.8%); present
(50.2%)
Not applicable

Absent (69.9%); present
(30.1%)
Absent (70.5%); present
(29.5%)
Down: absent (67.0%),
present (33.0%); UP:
absent (59.6%); present
(40.4%)
Absent (73.6%); present
(26.4%)
Absent (59.8%); present
(40.2%)
Absent (65.7%); present
(34.3%)
Absent (59.7%); present
(40.3%)
Absent (57.3%); present
(42.3%)
Absent (69.6%); present
(30.4%)
Absent (69.5%); present
(30.5%)
Absent (69.9%); present
(30.1%)
Absent (69.9%); present
(30.1%)
Absent (70.0%); present
(30.0%)
Not applicable

Low (48.562.7%); high (37.3
51.5%)
Low (23.547.2%); high (52.8
76.5%)
Down: low (33.749.3%); high
(50.766.3%)

14) Strong Sasi implementation Not applicable

Not applicable

Not applicable

15) Population growth not
affected
16) Alternative job present

Low (51.8%); med
(25.5%); high (22.7%)
Not applicable

Absent (71.0%); present
(29.0%)
Not applicable

Absent (69.6%); present
(30.4%)
Not applicable

17) 13)+14)+15)+16)

Low (51.7%); med
(25.8%); high (22.5%)

Absent (71.2%); present
(28.8%)

Absent (69.5%); present
(30.5%)

1) Habitat quality improved
2) Abundance trend down or
up

3) Sighting of outsiders absent
4) 1) + 2)
5) 1)+2)+3)
6) Catch trend down
7) Abundance trend down +
catch trend down
8) Sasi strengthened
9) Modernization of fishing
gear
10) Bad relationship with
village leader
11) Bad relationship with
fishery officer
12) Tourism highly affected
13) Strong enforcement

Low (49.2%); med
(28.3%); high (22.5%)
Low (41.2%); med
(29.3%); high (29.4%)
Low (28.3%); med
(31.4%); high (40.3%)
Low (51.9%); med
(25.7%); high (22.3%)
Low (53.8%); med
(25.5%); high (20.7%)
Low (34.3%); med
(34.1%); high (31.5%)
Low (46.9%); med
(26.5%); high (26.6%)
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable

CPUE for small-scale operators (up to four people on board,
covering 67.8% of survey respondents) was 52.1%. When fishers
perceived habitat condition had improved and fish abundance was
higher, the probability of CPUE being low decreased to 41.2%
(Table 3). The probability of a low CPUE was further reduced to
28.3% when sighting of outsiders fishing in the respondents
territorial water was absent in addition to the improved habitat
and fish abundance trend. When fishers perceived Sasi laut to be
strong, the probability of CPUE being low decreased to 34.3%,
suggesting that Sasi laut alone could have a large impact on
maintaining the CPUE level. Modernization of fishing gear also
reduced the probability of a low CPUE by 5.2% to 46.9% (Table
3). These findings generally applied to all size of operators.
One of the key social objectives of customary tenure systems and
traditional comanagement is to reduce the number of conflicts
(FAO 1999), and examples have been reported within Indonesia
(Campbell et al. 2012, Cinner et al. 2012a). The base case

Low (47.262.7%); high (37.3
52.8%)
Low (13.232.0%); high (68.0
86.8%)
Low (13.231.9%); high (68.1
86.8%)
Low (47.462.9%); high (37.1
52.6%)
Low (50.770.6%); high (29.4
49.3%)
Low (48.262.1%); high (37.9
51.8%)
Low (48.963.2%); high (36.8
51.1%)
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Low (44.160.4%); high (39.6
55.9%)
Low (38.757.4%); high (42.6
61.3%)
Low (42.859.8%); high (40.2
57.2%)
Low (38.857.7%); high (42.3
61.2%)
Low (26.951.3%); high (48.7
73.1%)

suggested that the probability of a fisher being involved in a
conflict with other fishers in the same village (intravillage
conflicts) was 30.6%. Having a bad relationship with village
leaders increased the probability of intravillage conflicts by
almost 20% to 50.3%, while having a bad relationship with fishery
officers had a less severe impact, with only a 5% increase in the
probability of intravillage conflicts. Tourism development also
had a large impact on the presence of intravillage conflicts (50.2%
probability) when fishers perceived they were highly affected by
tourism. The probability of intravillage conflicts was lower
(26.4%) when sighting of outsiders fishing in the respondents
territorial water was absent, compared to when it was present
(35.2%). In contrast, the probability of intervillage conflicts was
slightly higher (33.6%) when sighting of outsiders was absent,
compared to when it was present (26.5%) Similarly, lower
perceived catch trends and lower fish stock abundance both
reduced the probability of intravillage conflicts slightly (by 4.3%
and 4.7%, respectively) from the base case (30.6%), while the

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

Fig. 2. Bayesian belief network model showing the interrelationships of factors influencing fishing activities and
resource management under a Sasi regime in the Kei Islands. See Table 2 for the definitions of the variables
(CMT: customary marine tenure).

probability of intervillage conflict (conflicts with other villagers)
increased from 30.1% to 40.3% with lower catch trend, and from
30.1% to 33.0% with lower fish abundance trend. When both catch
and abundance trends were worse, the magnitude of the impact
on the presence of conflict was much larger, with 29.2% reduction
in intravillage conflict, and 12.6% increase in intervillage conflict.
Drawing on existing literature, we assumed that the states of
future fish abundance, a key environmental objective of CMT,
depended on the current fish abundance trend, habitat quality,
and fishing pressure, which can be affected by the cost of fishing,
availability of alternative employment, population growth, and
implementation of CMT. The household survey results suggested
that most respondents acknowledged the existence of Sasi rules,
with 86.3% acknowledging the existence of temporal sea area
closure, seasonal closure of approximately 1 month (on average),
and protection of at least one species (in terms of harvest
restrictions). Despite the high level of acknowledgement of Sasi
rule existence, 92.3% of respondents felt that Sasi has weakened
or totally disappeared in their village (Table 2). This gap is likely
due to weak enforcement of Sasi regulations, as indicated by the
low levels of sanctions (less than 6.4% adopted any sanctions),
high incidence of outsiders fishing in the respondents territorial
waters (47.4%), and lack of vessel monitoring or patrolling to
detect violation of Sasi. Adhuri (2013) also suggested that there
are, in general, not enough speedboats and personnel to carry out
patrols in the region. Our model suggests that strong enforcement
through the introduction of a monitoring program to patrol the
sea, and strong Sasi implementation in terms of a combination
of customary area closures, seasonal closures, and species
protection may reduce the probability of fishing pressure being
high from approximately 4752% to 3033%. This would be
further reduced when population growth is lower (21.325.7%)
and alternative jobs are present (13.317.7%). These factors
together contribute to lower fishing pressure, which reduces the
probability of future fish abundance being low from between
48.5% and 62.7% (base case) to between 26.9% and 51.3% (Table

3). A stronger Sasi implementation also means a better chance of
achieving both the social and economic objectives, as a higher
probability of increasing CPUE and lower conflicts can be
expected through reduced incidence of outsiders fishing in the
respondents territorial waters.
Sensitivity analyses
The results of sensitivity analyses (Table 4) showed that for CPUE,
the number of paid employee, modernization of fishing gear, and
perceived habitat quality were the top three most influential
factors in both subdistricts. The influence of Sasi strength and
presence of outsiders fishing in the respondents territorial water
was ranked 4th and 5th in Dullah Utara, while perceived fish
abundance and Sasi strength took the 4th and 5th place in Kei
Kecil. External stressors, such as deforestation, urbanization,
population growth, and aquaculture development all affect
perceived habitat condition; hence, there are indirect impacts on
CPUE, but their influence in terms of variance reduction was
minimal (ranked 8th12th).
Factors most influential to intervillage conflicts were perceived
catch trend (whether catch is increasing/decreasing or
unchanged), sighting of outsiders fishing in the respondents
territorial waters, perceived fish abundance, modernization of
fishing gear, and presence of intravillage conflicts in both
subdistricts, although their ranks were slightly different in each
subdistrict. Tourism, perceived fish abundance trend, catch trend,
and sighting of outsiders were influential in terms of intravillage
conflicts in both subdistricts. The influence of relationships with
village leaders affected the probability of intravillage conflicts
more in Dullah Utara, while the relationships with fishery officers
affected it more in Kei Kecil.
In both subdistricts, fishing pressure was by far the most
influential to the probability of future fish abundance, followed
by perceived habitat quality, perceived current fish abundance
trend, availability of alternative jobs, and Sasi implementation of

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

Table 4. Sensitivity analysis results of factors affecting catch per unit effort (CPUE), conflicts, and future fish stock abundance. Only
the factors with the five highest scores are shown.

Dullah Utara

Kei Kecil

Sensitivity of CPUE coastal
Factor
Number of paid employees
Fishing gear
Habitat quality
Sasi strength
Outsiders

Variance reduction
910.6
521.3
283.4
149.3
51.4

Factor
Number of paid employees
Fishing gear
Habitat quality
Abundance trend
Sasi strength

Variance reduction
1417.0
164.5
123.4
100.7
94.6

Sensitivity of intervillage conflicts
Factor
Catch trend
Outsiders
Fishing gear
Abundance trend
Intravillage conflict

Entropy reduction
0.01995
0.00293
0.00088
0.00031
0.00013

Factor
Catch trend
Abundance trend
Outsiders
Intravillage conflict
Fishing gear

Entropy reduction
0.02666
0.00228
0.00169
0.00078
0.00010

Sensitivity of intravillage conflicts
Factor
Tourism
Abundance trend
Catch trend
Outsiders
Village leader relation

Entropy reduction
0.00467
0.00463
0.00210
0.00149
0.00098

Factor
Abundance trend
Tourism
Fishery officer relation
Catch trend
Outsiders

Entropy reduction
0.01098
0.00868
0.00728
0.00605
0.00583

Sensitivity of future fish stock abundance
Factor
Fishing pressure
Habitat quality
Alternative job
Abundance trend
Sasi implementation

Entropy reduction
0.14797
0.04283
0.02417
0.01255
0.01044

Factor
Fishing pressure
Habitat quality
Alternative job
Abundance trend
Sasi implementation

Entropy reduction
0.14082
0.04238
0.02200
0.01269
0.01042

management rules. This suggests that a combination of measures
to reduce fishing pressure may be effective in achieving higher
future fish abundance. Other lesser but important factors (ranked
6th10th) to future fish abundance were population growth, cost
of fishing, CPUE, enforcement, and sea area closure.
Perceived fish abundance trend was listed as among the most
important (top five) factors for all three indicators. This indicates
that local knowledge about current fish abundance is a key driver
of fishing activities that affect the successful outcome of achieving
all social, economic, and environment objectives. Presence of
outsiders fishing in the respondents territorial water was another
key driver that affected both CPUE and conflicts directly, and
future fish abundance indirectly, since the frequency of sighting
outsiders was linked to Sasi implementation.
DISCUSSION
It is well established that there are complex relationships,
interactions, and feedbacks between factors that influence fishing
activities (Gutierrez et al. 2011, Cinner et al. 2012b), particularly
in coastal communities where customary management applies to
local waters. The customary governance approaches to natural
resources management, including in the marine environment,
have many benefits (e.g., Ostrom 1990). However, many of the

traditional customary tenure systems have either collapsed or are
in danger of collapse (Evans et al. 1997, Thorburn 2000, 2001).
Nongovernmental organizations, international donor communities,
and national agencies are looking into reintroducing communitybased marine managed areas, but the functioning of customary
marine tenure must be better understood if they are to be
effectively incorporated into modern fishery management.
Understanding exactly how the social, economic, and
environmental outcomes of customary governance systems are
influenced by different human and natural drivers is key to
continued, and potentially improved, customary management. A
first step to either reinstating or reinvigorating customary
management of marine resources is to understand the
relationships between factors that influence fishing activities in
coastal communities and how these factors affect the economic,
social, and environmental outcomes of customary governance
systems. The Kei Islands in Indonesia have long-established
tenure systems where coastal resources have been communally
owned and managed by traditional laws (Sasi) governing natural
resources (Thorburn 2001), with subtle variations in the rules
between villages. The Kei Islands are used as a case study
community to investigate the factors that influence fishing
behavior and Sasi outcomes. To our knowledge, this is the first

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

study in which a Bayesian belief network has been applied to
explore complex variable interactions and social, environmental,
and economic outcomes in a customary marine tenure system.
Our results show that the cumulative impacts of multiple factors
on key social, economic, and environmental outcomes can be
much larger than the impact from a single source. For instance,
the probability of a low CPUE for small-scale operators can be
reduced much more when combining improved habitat quality,
upward stock abundance trend, and absence of the sighting of
outsiders fishing in their water (from 52% to 28%) rather than
only improving habitat quality (from 52% to 41%). This implies
that management or policy intervention could be more effective
when addressing multiple factors simultaneously.
The local communitys perception of the upward or downward
trend of fish abundance is a key factor influencing social,
economic, and environmental outcomes of Kei's CMT.
Perceptions are distinct from actual observed trends and might
in fact be at odds with trends. For instance, if local communities
are mis- or under- informed, they might believe fish abundance
is declining, where scientific measurements or monitoring might
indicate it is increasing (or the reverse). Previous studies in Fiji
and the Solomon Islands suggest that indigenous ecological
knowledge about the health of coral reels and fish stocks is not
always supported by quantitative studies (Aswani and Hamilton
2004, Albert et al. 2013). In the absence of a fishery-independent
monitoring program, it remains unclear whether local knowledge
about fish abundance in Kei is consistent with the actual trend.
However, having adequate knowledge by itself, without
concurrently having sufficient fish abundance, may not be enough
to meet the three objectives. Nevertheless, it is important that
government seeks to work in partnership with local communities
and to combine the strengths of indigenous ecological knowledge
and scientific information, since adequate local knowledge about
current fish abundance may play a key role in successfully
achieving social, economic, and environment outcomes in a
CMT.
Perceptions of local people with respect to Sasi strength and catch
trends were also important in meeting economic and social
objectives, respectively. Perceptions can be changed, for instance,
by improving the visibility of vessels monitoring and patrolling
an area, which can in turn change the perception of Sasi strength
and thus improve social outcomes for this CMT. Our results
suggest that strengthening of Sasi alone has the most prominent
impact on improving the economic (CPUE) indicator, which
supports Ruttans (1998) argument that the intention behind the
marine Sasi in Kei Besar Island is to maximize economic benefits
rather than conservation.
Our results also suggest that sighting outsider presence and
outsider fishing activity in territorial water is another key driver
that directly affects economic and social outcomes, and indirectly
affects environmental outcomes. The frequency of which
outsiders are sighted in territorial waters is strongly linked to the
perceived weakness or strength of Sasi implementation, although
results were found to be in opposing directions for intravillage
(negatively affected by stronger Sasi) and intervillage conflicts
(positively affected). The absence of outsiders can mean that
stronger exclusive user rights are in place (i.e., due to stronger
Sasi), which can in turn increase intervillage conflicts, while at the

same time reducing intravillage conflicts. This can create
complexity, as one of the key social objectives of customary tenure
systems and traditional comanagement is to reduce conflicts, and
lower levels of conflict suggest greater social capital, which is
considered integral to successful common-pool fishery
management.
Similarly, both lower perceived catch and fish abundance trends
reduced the probability of intravillage conflicts slightly where the
probability of intervillage conflicts increased (Table 3). In other
words, worsening environmental conditions have different effects
on the occurrence of intravillage and intervillage conflicts. This
may be because fishers in the same village cooperate to overcome
unfavorable fishing conditions, while such conditions may provide
incentives for fishers to operate in other villages territorial waters;
hence, increased intervillage conflicts. These interrelationships
strongly illustrate the close connection between ecological and
social outcomes, and the importance of considering socialecological systems as a whole.
Our results (Table 3) suggest that tourism development has a large
impact on the presence of intravillage conflicts. This may be due
to the nonextractive nature of tourism being in conflict with the
extractive nature of fishing, and the two are not perceived to be
complimentary activities. Increased tourism therefore means
more conflict between those who fish and those involved in the
tourism sector. This is interesting in that tourism is often
presented as the economic savior of tropical reef systems (and
small islands in the Pacific and elsewhere), but it may in fact create
conflict within the village and thus potentially undermine the
comanagement of the area (or the Sasi). In addition, the
intravillage conflict over tourism development could also result
in additional intervillage conflict. This perceived conflict between
simultaneous tourism and fishing activities was apparent in both
of the Kei Island study regions (Table 4), which suggests that this
conflict may also bear out at a broad regional scale.
Comanagement approaches and traditional customary tenure
systems are highly vulnerable to discontinuities and asymmetries
developing between the social, economic, and ecological system
(Ruddle 1993, Hviding 1998). The potential for disassociation
between the social and ecological domains in the Sasi
comanagement system suggests that equal attention should be
paid to monitoring both social acceptance and environmental
sustainability. If the social perception of Sasi effectiveness is
slowly being eroded, it may be difficult to correct this
retrospectively or to resurrect the Sasi should it cease to exist
locally. This may be particularly true for villages that are internally
socially challenged. The BBN model suggests that intravillage
conflict explains intervillage conflict (but not vice versa). Villages
that are internally socially challenged are also more likely to be
externally socially challenged. So if an internally strong
community can be maintained, it is more likely that harmonious
resource sharing will occur with other villages.
Interviews undertaken as part of this project revealed that there
was a high level of local knowledge of Sasi and the existing
governance rules. However, this intimate local knowledge of Sasi
did not translate into general acceptance of the Sasi system in the
sense that a high number of people believed the rules were
unsuccessful and often not observed by marine resource users.
This may at first glance seem problematic, but the high level of

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

knowledge and at the same time the large number of disaffected
people may in fact provide an opportunity for improving the
functioning of Sasi in the future. A recent study conducted in
Ache Province of Indonesia suggests that people who had positive
views of their customary management systems were generally
more wealthy and had higher fortnightly expenditure (Setiawan
et al. 2012). Greater wealth and lower poverty can play a critical
role in the perception of CMT (Cinner and Pollnac 2004), and
our study will benefit from the inclusion of general household
expenditure (a proxy for household income) in the BBN
framework when such data become available. Strengthening vessel
monitoring or patrolling to detect offenses and weak sanctions
also seems to provide a way to improve the Sasi and change
community perceptions of its success. Our interviews with
villagers, as well as Adhuri (2013), suggest that sometimes Sasi
itself causes local conflicts when Sasi is implemented improperly
(different from the original meaning defined in the Larwul Ngabal
customary law). As such misuse of Sasi can create uneven
distribution of marine resources and distrust between village
leaders and villagers, we suggest that future studies consider
perceived objectives of Sasi and how these perceptions affect
resource management outcomes. As mentioned in the preceding
paragraph, problems need to be addressed before the point at
which the Sasi problems and weaknesses become irreversible.
Facilitation of change by means of increasing (self or externally
driven) monitoring and enforcement while maintaining
ownership may be a good starting point. Monitoring and
enforcement can be improved by increasing the presence of local
village patrollers or enforcement agencies (Takahashi and van
Duijn 2012) but also, for instance, by increasing education or
changing the fishers decision framework. Decision frameworks
can be changed, for instance, by providing opportunities for
anonymous incidence reporting, which has proven to change
behavior and perceptions in some other locations (Aaron et al.
2000).
CONCLUSION
The core of a successful customary management system lies in
the achievement of different environmental and socioeconomic
objectives. For a coastal community with a CMT system to
achieve its different objectives, the drivers that influence fishing
behavior have to be well understood. A BBN model based on
empirical data can be used to represent different factors that drive
fishing activity and to assess the influence and impact of changing
social, economic, and environmental conditions on meeting the
communitys CMT objectives.
Bayesian belief network models are particularly useful in
highlighting current information and knowledge gaps that are
important for decision-makers, but as additional or more accurate
resource user or community information becomes available,
models can be further developed and expanded. Impacts
following changes in fishery management, while accounting for
uncertainties regarding costs and benefits of management
decisions (e.g., effectiveness of introducing a monitoring
program), can be trailed using these flexible models. Extended
models are useful as decision support tools for resource
management, as interactions between variables and the relative
influence of variables on final management outcomes can be
easily explored.

In this study, we found that the current lack of empirical
information available to quantify the level of fishing pressure,
which is a key variable in its impact on future stock abundance,
needs immediate attention to ensure that CMT objectives will be
met in the foreseeable future. Aside from accurate fishing pressure
information, the continued existence and potential future creation
of CMTs to manage marine resources in coastal communities that
depend on these resources for livelihoods and food security relies
on government programs that carefully consider local cultural
values. Ensuring congruence with local values and perceptions of
CMT effectiveness, for instance through monitoring and
patrolling, will likely determine the longevity of these
management systems. Strong local support for the CMT is a key
driver of lasting success. Aside from influencing factors that
directly affect cultural and social perceptions of the CMT,
governments also have to positively influence indirect factors such
as job creation and reducing local poverty.

Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/issues/responses.
php/8285

LITERATURE CITED
Aaron, H., S. Jaffry, O. Thbaud, and E. Bennett. 2000.
Normative and social influences affecting compliance with fishery
regulations. Land Economics 76(3):448461. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/3147040
Adhuri, D. S. 2013. Selling the sea, fishing for power: a study of
conflict over marine tenure in Kei Islands, eastern Indonesia.
Australian National University E Press, Canberra, Australia.
Albert, S., M. Love, and T. D. Brewer. 2013. Contrasts in social
and ecological assessments of coral reef health in Melanesia.
Pacific Science 67(3):409424. http://dx.doi.org/10.2984/67.3.8
Aswani, S., G. G. Gurney, S. Mulville, J. Matera, and M. Gurven.
2013. Insights from experimental economics on local cooperation
in a small-scale fishery management system. Global
Environmental Change 23(6):14021409. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.gloenvcha.2013.08.003
Aswani, S., and R. J. Hamilton. 2004. Integrating indigenous
ecological knowledge and customary sea tenure with marine and
social science for conservation of bumphead parrotfish
(Bolbometopon muricatum) in the Roviana Lagoon, Solomon
Islands. Environmental Conservation 31(01):6983. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/s037689290400116x
Badan Pusat Statistik. 2014a. Maluku tenggara in figures (p. 344).
Southeast Maluku Regency (badan pusat statistik kabupaten
maluku tenggara). Central Board of Statistic.
Badan Pusat Statistik. 2014b. Tual in figures (p. 320). Southeast
Maluku Regency (badan pusat statistik kabupaten maluku
tenggara). Central Board of Statistic.
Campbell, S. J., J. E. Cinner, R. L. Ardiwijaya, S. Pardede, T.
Kartawijaya, A. Mukmunin, Y. Herdiana, A. S. Hoey, M. S.
Pratchett, and A. H. Baird. 2012. Avoiding conflicts and

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

protecting coral reefs: customary management benefits marine
habitats and fish biomass. Oryx 46(04):486494. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/s0030605312000348
Cinner, J. 2005. Socioeconomic factors influencing customary
marine tenure in the Indo-Pacific. Ecology and Society 10(1):36.
Cinner, J. E., X. Basurto, P. Fidelman, J. Kuange, R. Lahari, and
A. Mukminin. 2012a. Institutional designs of customary fisheries
management arrangements in Indonesia, Papua New Guinea,
and Mexico. Marine Policy 36(1):278285. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpol.2011.06.005
Cinner, J. E., T. R. McClanahan, M. A. MacNeil, N. A. J. Graham,
T. M. Daw, A. Mukminin, D. A. Feary, A. L. Rabearisoa, A.
Wamukota, N. Jiddawi, S. J. Campbell, A. H. Baird, F. A.
Januchowski-Hartley, S. Hamed, R. Lahari, T. Morove, and J.
Kuange. 2012b. Comanagement of coral reef social-ecological
systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109
(14):52195222. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1121215109
Cinner, J. E., and R. B. Pollnac. 2004. Poverty, perceptions and
planning: why socioeconomics matter in the management of
Mexican reefs. Ocean & Coastal Management 47(910):479493.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2004.09.002
Cooke, A. J., N. V. C. Polunin, and K. Moce. 2000. Comparative
assessment of stakeholder management in traditional Fijian
fishing-grounds. Environmental Conservation 27(03):291299.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0376892900000333
Cox, M., G. Arnold, and S. V. Toms. 2010. A review of design
principles for community-based natural resource management.
Ecology and Society 15(4):38.
Evans, S. M., M. E. Gill, A. S. W. Retraubun, J. Abrahamz, and
J. Dangeubun. 1997. Traditional management practices and the
conservation of the gastropod (Trochus nilitocus) and fish stocks
in the Maluku Province (eastern Indonesia). Fisheries Research
31(12):8391. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0165-7836(97)00011-8
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
1999. Use of property rights in fisheries management. FAO
Fisheries Technical Paper 404/1. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Gutierrez, N. L., R. Hilborn, and O. Defeo. 2011. Leadership,
social capital and incentives promote successful fisheries. Nature
470(7334):386389. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature09689
Haapasaari, P., and T. P. Karjalainen. 2010. Formalizing expert
knowledge to compare alternative management plans:
sociological perspective to the future management of Baltic
salmon stocks. Marine Policy 34(3):477486. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpol.2009.10.002

Sparholt, and O. Varis. 1999. Modeling environmentally driven
uncertainties in Baltic cod (Gadus morhua) by Bayesian influence
diagrams. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 56
(4):629641. http://dx.doi.org/10.1139/f98-206
Levontin, P., S. Kulmala, P. Haapasaari, and S. Kuikka. 2011.
Integration of biological, economic, and sociological knowledge
by Bayesian belief networks: the interdisciplinary evaluation of
potential management plans for Baltic salmon. ICES Journal of
Marine Science: Journal du Conseil 68(3):632638. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/icesjms/fsr004
Liese, C., M. D. Smith, and R. A. Kramer. 2007. Open access in
a spatially delineated artisanal fishery: the case of Minahasa,
Indonesia. Environment and Development Economics 12(01):123
143. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s1355770x06003421
Little, L. R., S. Kuikka, A. E. Punt, F. Pantus, C. R. Davies, and
B. D. Mapstone. 2004. Information flow among fishing vessels
modelled using a Bayesian network. Environmental Modelling &
Software 19(1):2734. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1364-8152(03)
00100-2
Marcot, B. G., J. D. Steventon, G. D. Sutherland, and R. K.
McCann. 2006. Guidelines for developing and updating Bayesian
belief networks applied to ecological modeling and conservation.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 36(12):30633074. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1139/x06-135
Mosse, J. W., J. M. S. Tetelepta, and F. X. V. R. Letsoin. 2012.
Hawear di kepulauan kei (hawear in Kei Islands). Ambon.
Nikijuluw, V. P. H. 1994. Indigenous fisheries resource
management in the Maluku Islands. Indigenous Knowledge and
Development Monitor 2(2):68.
Novaczek, I., H. T. Harkes, J. Sopacua, and M. D. D. Tatuhey.
2001. An institutional analysis of Sasi laut in Maluku, Indonesia.
The WorldFish Center, Penang, Malaysia.
Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: the evolution of
institutions for collective action. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, U.S.A. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511807763
Pollnac, R., P. Christie, J. E. Cinner, T. Dalton, T. M. Daw, G. E.
Forrester, N. A. J. Graham, and T. R. McClanahan. 2010. Marine
reserves as linked social-ecological systems. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107(43):1826218265. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0908266107
Ruddle, K. 1993. External forces and change in traditional
community-based shery management systems in the Pacific
island region. Maritime Anthropological Studies 6(12):137.

Hviding, E. 1998. Contextual flexibility: present status and future
of customary marine tenure in Solomon Islands. Ocean & Coastal
Management 40(23):253269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0964-5691
(98)00042-8

Ruddle, K. 1998. The context of policy design for existing
community-based fisheries management systems in the Pacific
Islands. Ocean & Coastal Management 40(23):105126. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0964-5691(98)00040-4

Korb, K. B., and A. E. Nicholson. 2011. Bayesian artificial
intelligence. Chapman & Hall/CRC, London, UK. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1201/9780203491294

Ruttan, L. M. 1998. Closing the commons: cooperation for gain
or restraint? Human Ecology 26(1):4366. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/A:1018744816814

Kuikka, S., M. Hildn, H. Gislason, S. Hansson, H. Sparholt, O.
Varis, S. Kuikka, M. Hildn, H. Gislason, S. Hansson, H.

Setiawan, A., J. E. Cinner, S. G. Sutton, and A. Mukminin. 2012.
The perceived impact of customary marine resource management

Ecology and Society 21(2): 16
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol21/iss2/art16/

on household and community welfare in northern Sumatra,
Indonesia. Coastal Management 40(3):239249. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/08920753.2012.677626
Southeast Maluku Regional Development Planning Agency.
2012. Southeast Maluku regency spatial plan 563. 20122032.
Government of Southeast Maluku Regency, Langgur, Indonesia.
Takahashi, B., and A. P. van Duijn. 2012. Operationalizing
fisheries co-management: lessons learned from lagoon fisheries
co-management in Thua Thien Hue Province, Viet Nam. FAP
Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand.
Thorburn, C. 2001. The house that poison built: customary
marine property rights and the live food fish trade in the Kei
Islands, Southeast Maluku. Development and Change 32(1):151
180. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-7660.00200
Thorburn, C. C. 2000. Changing customary marine resource
management practice and institutions: the case of Sasi lola in the
Kei Islands, Indonesia. World Development 28(8):14611479.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0305-750x(00)00039-5
Ticehurst, J. L., L. T. H. Newham, D. Rissik, R. A. Letcher, and
A. J. Jakeman. 2007. A Bayesian network approach for assessing
the sustainability of coastal lakes in New South Wales, Australia.
Environmental Modelling & Software 22(8):11291139. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2006.03.003
van Putten, I., A. Lalancette, P. Bayliss, D. Dennis, T. Hutton, A.
Norman-Lpez, S. Pascoe, E. Plagnyi, and T. Skewes. 2013. A
Bayesian model of factors influencing indigenous participation
in the Torres Strait tropical rocklobster fishery. Marine Policy
37:96105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2012.04.001
Varis, O., and S. Kuikka. 1997. Joint use of multiple
environmental assessment models by a Bayesian meta-model: the
Baltic salmon case. Ecological Modelling 102(23):341351.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0304-3800(97)00068-9
Viswanathan, K. K., I. H. Omar, Y. Jeon, J. Kirkley, D. Squires,
and I. Susilowati. 2001. Fishing skill in developing country
fisheries: the kedah, Malaysia trawl fishery. Marine Resource
Economics 16(4):293314. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/mre.16.4.42629339
Yu, J., V. A. Smith, P. P. Wang, A. J. Hartemink, and E. D. Jarvis.
2004. Advances to Bayesian network inference for generating
causal networks from observational biological data. Bioinformatics
20(18):35943603. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth448

View publication stats

