Proceedings of the
2007 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium
Istanbul, Turkey, June 13-15, 2007

ThE1.25

Design of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles for
Cage Aquafarms
JongAn Lee, MooTaek Roh, KyungMan Kim and Doheon Lee*

Abstract  Aquaculture systems need to provide artificial
monitoring and control functions to maintain essential
environmental factors within the high productivity ranges. This
paper suggests that autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV)
equipped with various sensors, communication devices, and
navigational intelligence can perform effective and broad-range
monitoring missions of cage-based aquaculture system
surroundings. After explaining the target aquaculture system, we
describe functional and performance requirements of AUVs for
surveillance of costal cage aquafarms. It also describes several
design options considered for this ongoing project as well as
artificial immune-based intelligence features.

T

I. INTRODUCTION

hough the consumption of fishery products has been
ever increasing, fishery amounts from open wild
habitats have encountered serious challenges due to several
reasons including overfishing and environmental changes
[1]. One of solutions is to establish aquaculture facilities
where fisheries are bred, raised, and caught under high
productivity settings. It has been known that the
proliferation, survival and growth of marine fishes are very
sensitive to environmental factors such as temperature,
acidity, dissolved oxygen concentration, and pathogenic
microbes [2]. Unlikely to the open wild habitats where the
fishes could migrate to their preferable regions
autonomously, the aquaculture systems need to provide
artificial monitoring and control functions to maintain such
environmental factors within high productivity ranges.
Among several types of aquaculture systems, this paper
focuses on cage-based aquaculture systems operated in
coastal areas. Though cultivated fishes are kept inside the
cages, the afore-mentioned environmental factors are highly

Manuscript received January 14, 2007. This work was supported in part
by the Korea Ministry of Information and Communication under Grant
C109006020001
JongAn Lee is with the Department of Bio and Brain Engineering,
KAIST, 373-1, Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
MooTaek Roh is with the Department of Bio and Brain Engineering,
KAIST, 373-1, Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
KyungMan Kim is with the Department of Bio and Brain Engineering,
KAIST, 373-1, Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
Doheon Lee is with the Department of Bio and Brain Engineering,
KAIST, 373-1, Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701,
Korea(Phone:
+82-42-869-4316;
Fax:+82-42-869-8680;
E-mail:
dhlee@kaist.ac.kr).

1-4244-1068-1/07/$25.00 2007 IEEE.

affected by surrounding oceanic regions since the sea water
is allowed to flow through the cages. For example, mass
outbreaks of death can happen if cold water suddenly flows
into the cages from the sea floor. Proliferation of pathogens
inside or outside cages can put critical dangers on the
aquafarms while the early detection is almost impossible.
The current solution is the necropsy of dead fishes to
identify pathogens after the dead outbreak prevails. Since
the ranges of affecting oceanic regions amount to several
thousand meters depending on the factors, it is hard to
deploy sufficient number of fixed sensors over the regions
both in technical and economical aspects.
This paper suggests that autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUV) equipped with essential sensors, communication
devices, and navigational intelligence can provide
acceptable solutions to this problem. After explaining the
target aquaculture systems, we describe functional and
performance requirements of autonomous underwater
vehicles for surveillance of costal cage aquafarms. It also
describes several design options considered for this ongoing
project.
II. COASTAL CAGE AQUAFARMS
A. Aquaculture Types
Aquaculture is defined as the practice of using the sea,
lakes, and rivers for cultivating aquatic animals and plants,
especially for consumption as food. It is distinguished from
fishing by active human efforts in maintaining or increasing
the species involved, as opposed to simply taking them from
the wild habitats. Aquaculture systems for marine products
can be classified into three types according to the cultivation
areas. (i) The indoor tank systems are using plastic or
concrete tanks to raise fishes. The tank water is slowly
circulated through pipes with pathogen filters, which are
connected from the coast to the aquafarms, so that fishes can
be provided with natural sea water regularly. (ii) The cage
systems are using synthetic fiber cages installed several
kilometers apart from the coasts. Fishes are kept inside the
cages while natural sea water flows through the cages freely.
Free flow of natural sea water is critical for cultivation of
special fish species such as flat fishes. However, these fishes
are always exposed to danger under water. (iii) Open marine
ranches are designated areas in the middle of the sea where

938

ThE1.25

artificially enriched ecosystems are fostered. For example,
massive marine plants and submarine structures are
implanted to provide cultivated fishes with nutrients and
shelters.
B. Cage Aquaculture Systems
This paper focuses on a specific type of cage aquaculture
systems being used predominantly in Korea. Each farm
consists of tens of beds, and each bed consists of four cells.
The dimension of the cell is typically 5*5*5 meters. It is
recommended that around 15 beds are deployed in a unit
region of 10k square meters (Figure 1).

Figure 1. The typical Layout of Cage Aquafarms

C. Environmental Factors
We should consider several problems for cultivating
fishes. Among them, growth promotion and prevention of
mass death of fishes are absolutely important. For that, we
should observe water quality at all times. To estimate water
quality, we check temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO),
ammonia, nitrites, nitrates, and pH and alkalinity of water.
Between them, temperature is the important factor because
fishes live within the optimal temperature range. If the
temperature is below the threshold, they could not live any
more.
The red tide is frequently occurred in Korea for June
through August. They are usually not harmful. However, the
excessive proliferation of zooplankton results in extensive
damage to fishes caught in gill nets. Thus, it triggers mass
death of fishes.
Recently, we acquire water quality data through the data
logger system. It has several sensors to measure water
quality. It is convenient to use within limited areas. However,
we should cover relatively large area around aquafarms.
Thus, it is inconvenient because users should move
frequently to measure data around aquafarms.
III. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND PRINCIPLES
Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) have been
utilized for scientific, commercial and military underwater
applications [3]. These vehicles require autonomous
guidance and control systems to perform missions under
water. For that, AUVs have their own energy sources and
have many electrical devices. REMUS and GAVIA is

well-known AVUs. They are used for oceanic exploration
and military applications. They are used for hydrographic
surveys, environmental monitoring and scientific samplings
[4]. Although, these state-of-the-art AUVs have excellent
functions and performance, it is inadequate to apply cage
aquafarm surveillance. They are expensive approximately
half million dollars and their design objective is not
appropriate to ours as described below.
A. Requirements of AUVs for Cage Aquafarms
We divide Unmanned Underwater Vehicles (UUVS) into
two parts according to their autonomy. One is autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) which can navigate under
water without assistance from supervisors. The other is
remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) which are supported by
mother ship through a cable. Between them, AUVs are more
adequate than ROVs because we need intelligent vehicles
navigating autonomously around aquafarms. For that, we
should consider several requirements of AUVs for
surveillance of coastal cage aquafarms.
First, the accuracy of AUVs should be sustained.
(1) Exact handling in low speeds is important because AUVs
should measure water quality at the target spot in low
speeds.
(2) The accurate transmission of position is necessary. We
do not know whether AUVs navigate adequately or not.
Second, the stability of AUVs should be obtained.
(3) AUVs turn frequently their direction to perform their
mission around aquafarms. As a result, they are affected by
drag force or pressure and lose their attitude. It is important
to keep attitude and position stable.
Third, the efficiency of AUVs should be attained
(4) Basically, AUVs need sufficient space to equip electrical
devices and batteries. In addition, they need various sensors
to measure water quality and control attitude. Thus, the
adequate arrangement of device is important to reduce the
unnecessary space.
(5) AUVs should optimally move to the aiming point to
minimize the consumption of batteries.
Fourth, the invariability of AUVs should be maintained.
(6) The deeper AUVs go under water the more pressure is
exerted on the whole craft. The minimal shape change of the
hull is important to keep inner devices safe because they
have an important role to manage AUVs.
Fifth, the tenacity of communication systems is needed.
(7) The communication system of AUVs should be robust
against noise signals to minimize error rate. It is important
delivering the exact data to users.
Sixth, the accessibility of AUVs should be easy.
(8) We frequently modify control program according to
missions. We adjust operational depth, pathway and sensing
rate. Thus, we should easily access control system.
Seventh, the riskiness of AUVs is minimized.
(9) When AUVs navigate around aquafarms, the fishes can
get stress from the light or sound of AUVs.

939

ThE1.25

B. Cost Aspects of Design Principles
Existing AUVs have excellent performance. They can
navigate under water from 100 to 6,000 meters. Expensive
devices are equipped to navigate faster and deeper under
water. However, we need not high-end AUVs for
surveillance of aquafarms because our operational depth is
approximately 10 meters. Thus, we can make AUVs by
using devices of low price. In addition, we can minimize the
cost of the waterproof hull fabrication.
IV. THE DESIGN OF SYSTEMS
A. Overall Surrounding of the Aquafarm AUV System
AUVs collect data during their missions with respect to
temperature, DO, PH. These data are delivered from the
intelligent vehicle to the optimal buoy communication
system. Buoy communication systems transfer these data to
the underwater station (Figure 2). After data processing, the
underwater station sends a message to fishermen. Thus,
fishermen can cope with problems which are extraordinary
low temperature or low dissolved oxygen through migration
of aquafarms to another place.

Figure 3. Pressure resistance according to shape of the hull

The streamlining hull helps decrease the drag and lowers the
amount of power needed to move the vehicle at a certain
speed [5].
b)

Thrusters

We will equip twin thrusters with AUVs. However, they
are less effective than one thruster because they need more
energy sources to cruise under water. Nevertheless, we use
twin thrusters because they promise the high quality of
rotation. In case of our systems, we should move frequently
to measure the water quality data. Thus, two thrusters are
more efficient than one thruster regardless of the weak point.
c)

Electrical devices

We need several sensors for the control of attitude and
position of AUVs and the measurement of water quality
around aquafarms. Pressure sensors are used to calculate
depth along with water pressure. Sonar sensors are used to
detect obstacle and topography. The magnetic compass is
used to detect attitude of AUVs. These sensors are contained
the electronics housing (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Internal Arrangements of Aquafarm AUVs

The microcontroller and On board PC are also contained
in electronics housing. We describe the circuit of the
pressure sensor whose signals are conditioned by power and
operational amp (Figure 5).

Figure 2. Overall Surrounding of Aquafarm AUVs

B. AUV/SCA systems
1) Design of AUVs
a)

a)

External shape of the hull

Generally, AUVs have several shapes sphere, cube or
cylinder. According to their hull shape, they are affected
differently by water. The best shape is a sphere to resist
water pressure because water pushes equally from all sizes
of the sphere (Figure 3).

Control of AUVs

There are several complex factors and nonlinear forces
under water. Thus, it is difficult to design the accurate
control model of AUVs. Their attitude information is
processed by On-board PC and AUVs can correct their
attitude based on information. They need control algorithms
to process information. Advanced control systems have
shown that autonomous diving and steering of unmanned
underwater vehicles can be controlled by multivariable
sliding mode control [6]. Recently, discrete-time

940

ThE1.25

Quasi-sliding mode systems have been adapted for control
of autonomous underwater vehicles [7]. However, these
control methods have several difficulties to apply
autonomous underwater vehicles. Hence, we utilize the
classicalcontrol method which is PID controllers for the
control of the attitude and position of the underwater
vehicles.

Base Line (SSBL). Among them, Long Base Line (LBL) is a
basic method to estimate AUVs position [8]. The mother
ship calculates a relative position of AUVs comparing to
three transponders. However, this method needs more
equipment than others and it contains position error because
of the movement of mother ship. Thus, we design the RLBL
(Reverse Long Base Line) method to minimize errors and
maximize efficiency. Position information is transferred by
satellites to buoy systmes. Based on this information, each
buoy system calculates relative position of AUVs. After that,
this information is delivered to the underwater station and
users know the current position of AUVs.
3) Software
a)

The underwater vehicle control program directs the
movement of AUVs. Users select the vehicle operation
parameters such as speed and depth, and to control the data
collection rate of sensors. Users give instructions to the
Driving AUV Block and Sensing Block through TCP/IP
protocol. The Driving Block control thrusters and a rudder.
Sensors measure the attitude of AUV and water quality.
These data are delivered to the Sensing Block through
RS232 protocol. Water quality data are transferred to
underwater station. The microcontroller gives instructions to
the Driving AUV Block by using attitude data (Figure 7).

Figure 5. The circuit of the pressure sensor

2) Communication systems
a)

AUVs Control program

Underwater Buoy Systems

We design underwater communication systems. We
combine wireless communication systems with underwater
communication systems. AUVs deliver acquired data to
underwater buoy systems through ultrasound waves. These
data are transferred to underwater stations (Figure 6).

Figure 6. Underwater Buoy Systems for Communication

b)

Underwater Stations

Figure 7. Architecture of the Control program

They receive data from underwater buoy systems. These
data are analyzed by monitoring systems. After that, they
transfer necessary information to fishermen by the mobile
phone.
c)

Underwater vehicles position tracking system

There are several methods to detect position of AUVs.
According to the length of transponder we classify them
Long Base Line (LBL), Short Base Line (SBL), Super Short

b)

Simulation for the control of AUVs

The Simulation is important because it give users chances
to test the performance of AUVs. It can reduce the gap
between the desired output and actual output. For example,
PDI controller is the classical control method. It is difficult
to find optimal Proportional, Integral and Derivative gain.

941

ThE1.25

TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF OUR AUVS

Thus, we can acquire adequate gain values through the
simulation of attitude and position of AUVs.
C. System development alternative & method
1) Electrical devices
Basically, we use existing electrical devices or modify
devices for our purpose. For example, there are many kinds
of pressure sensors. Among them, the pressure sensor should
satisfy high accuracy and stability against noise. In addition,
it should be operated at sealed underwater vehicles. Thus,
the M5100 pressure sensor of the Schaevitz firm is useful for
our systems. It can be worked all-metal sealed system and
supports extended temperature range, 1% total error band
and has compact outline [9].
Ahlborn firm has various sensors to measure humidity,
water quality, air velocity, and temperature [10]. Among
them, we select water analysis and temperature sensors.
However, we have difficulties to equip sensors with AUVs
because sensors are bar shape. Thus, we need reconstruction
of sensors to embed them with underwater vehicles.
2) Hull design
In designing the hull, we should consider pressure resistance
and drag force. They are determined by the hull shape sphere,
cube or cylinder. The sphere shape has the best pressure
resistance and the cylinder shape with dome ends has low
drag force. We should consider the design along with their
purpose. For instance, if you want low drag force, you
should choose cylinder shape. On the other hand, you need
more robust hull against water, you should select cube shape.
Thus, we choose the streamlining hull shape because it has
low drag force and moderate pressure resistance (Figure 8).
We describe rough specifications of our AUVs (Table 1).

Figure 8. The hull design of AUVs

3) Thrusters
We select the Model 300 thruster of Technadyne firm [11].
To determine thrusters, we assume the value of CD
(coefficient used in integrating forces and moments along
hull due to local cross-flow), A (projection area of hull in
xy-plane) according to the design.
From equation (3), we need 12kg bollard output to satisfy
a maximum velocity 2m/s. The Model 300 thruster has 8.2kg

Item
Dimension
Weight
Maximum Speed
Operation Depth

Specifications
0.3(D)*1.5(L) m
25~30 kg
2 m/s
0 ~ 10 m

m = meter, kg = kilogram, m/s = meter/second

forward thrust force and we will use two thrusters. Thus, we
can accomplish a maximum velocity by using two thrusters.
Maximum _ Velocity = 2m / s
1
Thrust = Drag =   C D  A  V 2 = 118.2kg
2
Bollard _ output = Thrust / 9.81 = 12kg
Thrust _ Power = Thrust  V = 236.3W

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

4) Energy sources
We use Lithium Polymer batteries which are rechargeable
and convenient. They are more expensive than lead storage
batteries. On the other hand, they guarantee both lower
weight and increased run times. In addition, they can be
protected from overcharging.
5) AUVs control program
We will develop control program by using C++ for the
microcontroller. The C++ language possesses property of
both the C language and the object oriented concept. The C
language is adequate in the system programming
Input-Output (I/O) control and object oriented concept help
us more convenient. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
provides reuse of code and minimizes time loss in debugging.
Thus, the C++ language is more reasonable than C language.
6) Communication Systems
We divide underwater buoy systems into two parts. The
upper device takes charge of wireless communication. It will
be equipped with the Wireless Ethernet transceiver for data
transmission to underwater stations. The lower device takes
charge of underwater communication. It has been
developing by ultrasound waves. We focus on the
development of underwater communication systems. We
should overcome some difficulties in developing systems.
Scattering, diffraction and interference of waves exist under
water. However, the operational depth of our system is up to
10 meters. We can minimize weak points of the wave under
water. After considering that, the lower device will be
equipped with Ultra sound receiver for data reception from
AUVs.

942

D. Design of Intelligent navigation methods adapted
Clonal Selection Algorithms (CSA)
1) Clonal Selection Algorithms (CSA)
The CSA is based on the artificial immune system. The

ThE1.25

CSA is used in the field of optimization and pattern
recognition. It establishes the idea that only those cells that
recognize the antigens are selected to proliferate. The
selected cells are subject to an affinity maturation process,
which improves their affinity to the selective antigens [12].
2) Intelligent navigation
AUVs should move to the every target point to measure
water quality and they occasionally move to the same tpoint.
There exist many kinds of possible pathways to move
around aquafarms. However, it is difficult to find the optimal
pathway. Thus, we can find the best solution through CAS.
First, generate possible pathways randomly from start point
and calculate all affinities with respect to navigation time.
Then, select pathways of high affinity. Make a lot of clones
of them, and mutate. Recalculate affinities and select
pathways of high affinity. Some randomly generated
parameters are mixed together at this moment. These
processes are iteratively performed until it converges.
Finally, pathways are optimally selected by CSA. It will
minimize time of navigation and the consumption of energy
sources of AUVs.

REFERENCES
[1]

P. B. MOYLE, Fishes : An introduction to ichthyology. USA: Prentice
Hall, 1982, pp. 607636.
[2] V. L. Nero, Fish-environment associations in the coastal waters of
Andros Island, The Bahamas, Environmental Bilogy of Fishes, vol.
75, no. 2, pp. 223236, 2006
[3] G. Griffiths, Technology and applications of autonomous underwater
vehicles. London & New york: Taylor & Francis, 2003, pp. 1-35.
[4] REMUS, http://www.hydroidinc.com / GAVIA, http://www.gavia.is
[5] H. Bohm, V. Jensen, Build Your Own Underwater Robot. Canada :
Westcoast Words, 1954, pp. 110-112.
[6] A. J. Healey, D. Lienard, Multivariable Sliding Mode Control for
Autonomous Diving and Steering of Unmanned Underwater
Vehicles, IEEE Journal of Oceanic Eng Vol. 18, No. 3, 1993
[7] P. M. Lee, S. W. Hong, Y. K. lim, C. M. Lee, B. H. Jeon, J. W. Park,
Discrete-Time Quasi-Sliding Mode Control of an Autonomous
Underwater Vehicle, IEEEE Journal of Oceanic Eng, Vol. 24 No.3,
pp. 388-395 ,1999
[8] N. Kussat, Absolute positioning of autonomous underwater vehicle
using GPS and acoustic measurements, IEEE JOURNAL OF
Oceanic Eng, vol. 30 NO.1, Jan. 2005
[9] M5100,http://www.meas-spec.com/myMeas/download/pdf/english/
msp/MSP-5100.pdf
[10] Ahlborn, http://www.ahlborn.com
[11] Model 300, http://www.tecnadyne.com/thrusters.htm
[12] L. N. Castro, F. J. Zuben, The Clonal Selection Algorithm with
Engineering Applications, Workshop Proceeding of GECCO, pp
36-37 ,2000

Figure 9. Intelligent navigation adapted CSA

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper has suggested autonomous underwater vehicle
(AUV)-based surveillance systems for effective and
broad-range monitoring missions of cage-based aquaculture
system surroundings. Unlikely to the state-of-the-art AUVs,
originally developed for military missions, the AUVs for
aquafarms have their own engineering compromises and
opportunities. It has also described artificial immune
techniques for intelligent navigation and situation
monitoring of the aquafarm AUVs.
Successful completion of this project will open new ways
of aquafarm surveillance as well as provide cost-effective
models of intelligent underwater vehicles for
mission-specific applications.

943

