RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS

Spatial marine zoning for fisheries and
conservation
Carissa Joy Klein1*, Charles Steinback2, Matthew Watts1, Astrid J Scholz2, and Hugh P Possingham1
Protected areas are an effective tool for reducing biodiversity loss. Current legislation distinguishes various
types of marine protected areas, each allowing different levels of resource extraction. However, almost all of
the theory for spatial conservation planning is focused on identifying no-take reserves. The current
approaches to zoning for multiple types of protected areas could result in suboptimal plans in terms of protecting biodiversity and minimizing negative socioeconomic impacts. We overcame these limitations in the
first application of the multizone planning tool, Marxan with Zones, to design a network of four types of protected areas in the context of Californias Marine Life Protection Act. We have produced a zoning configuration that entails mean value losses of less than 9% for every fishery, without compromising conservation
goals. We also found that a spatial numerical optimization tool that allows for multiple zones outperforms a
tool that can identify one zone (ie marine reserves) in two ways: first, the overall impact on the fishing industry is reduced, and second, a more equitable impact on different fishing sectors is achieved. Finally, we examined the tradeoffs between representing biodiversity features and impacting fisheries. Our approach is applicable to both marine and terrestrial conservation planning, and delivers an ecosystem-based management
outcome that balances conservation and industry objectives.
Front Ecol Environ 2010; 8(7): 349353, doi:10.1890/090047 (published online 20 Aug 2009)

W

orldwide, protected areas are a cornerstone of most
conservation strategies (Soul 1991), because they
are one of the most effective actions for curbing biodiversity loss (Bruner et al. 2001; Possingham et al. 2006). As a
result, there are several international mandates for the
establishment of protected areas (eg the Convention on
Biological Diversity). In response, national and local governments have developed initiatives for implementing
marine protected areas (MPAs), including Australias
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation
Act, Massachusetts Ocean Act, New Zealands
Biodiversity Strategy, and Great Britains Marine Bill.
Most marine conservation programs involve some form
of zoning. However, the theory behind spatial conservation planning focuses on selecting one type of protected
area  no-take reserves. There are many different types of
MPAs, with different levels of protection, ranging from
areas that allow selective extraction of resources to those
that are strictly no-take (see www.unep-wcmc.org/
protected_areas/categories/ and www.mpa.gov/). One
long-standing approach in designing reserves is to use
numerical optimization tools (eg Marxan, Zonation) to
identify areas that cost-effectively achieve ecological
objectives, namely comprehensively and adequately representing biodiversity (Kirkpatrick 1983; Possingham et al.
2006). However, use of these tools is limited in settings
where planners face the more complex problems of prioritizing for multiple types of MPAs and resource uses. To
compensate for the lack of an appropriate zoning tool,

1

University of Queensland, The Ecology Centre, St Lucia,
Queensland, Australia *(c.klein@uq.edu.au); 2Ecotrust, Portland, OR
 The Ecological Society of America

planners can use an optimization tool to design reserves
and then build other types of protected areas around them,
on the basis of ecological, socioeconomic, and political criteria, as is done in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and
Californias Channel Islands Sanctuary (Airame 2005;
Fernandes et al. 2005). Other spatial zoning approaches
based on multi-criteria analysis exist (Villa et al. 2002;
Bruce and Eliot 2006; Portman 2007), but they ignore
important principles of protected-area design (Margules
and Pressey 2000; Possingham et al. 2006). The resulting
zoning plans do not ensure that biodiversity features (ie
species and habitats) are represented cost effectively and
are therefore unlikely to be economically viable or to protect biodiversity.
The current approaches used to design MPAs could
result in plans that do not equitably minimize negative
impacts to stakeholders. For example, Klein et al. (2008a)
used Marxan to identify MPAs that minimize impacts to
two fishing sectors  commercial and recreational fisheries  while achieving biodiversity targets. In Marxan,
only one variable can be minimized, which in this case
was the sum of commercial and recreational fishing effort.
Although the overall impact was minimized, the commercial and recreational fishing sectors were impacted
disproportionately, with 17% and 4% of their grounds
lost, respectively  a socially and politically unfavorable
outcome where commercial and recreational fishing
interests frequently conflict. We hypothesized that a
more equitable outcome could be achieved with a multizone optimization tool that allows for the definition of
more specific constraints, including setting targets for
fisheries in areas where fishing is allowed.
www.frontiersinecology.org

349

Spatial marine zoning

350

(d)

CJ Klein et al.

Best solution, Marxan

California

(c)
Best solution
Marxan with Zones
(b)
Zone 1
(a)
Zone 4

Study region,
marine

regions have undergone a stakeholder-driven
design process informed by managers, administrators, and scientists. Our analysis was conducted on the region defined by the 5556-m
legal limits to Californias state waters from
Pigeon Point (37.185N latitude, 122.39W
longitude) to Alder Creek (39.005N,
123.696W) and around the Farallon Islands
(37.733N, 123.033W)  exclusive of San
Francisco Bay  a total area of 1977.5 km2
(Figure 1). We divided the region into 3610
planning units, each of which could be allocated to a zone. We addressed two of the
Initiatives core objectives in designing a network of MPAs: (1) protect representative and
unique habitats, and (2) minimize negative
socioeconomic impacts (Klein et al. 2008b).
Data

We used the same spatial data representing
habitats, depth zones, and commercial fishing
value as used in the Initiative. Habitats
1, no-take reserve
included coastal marshes, eelgrass, estuaries,
2, conservation high
3, conservation high/medium
hard bottom, kelp forests, soft bottom, surfSelection frequency
4, conservation medium
grass, and tidal flats (CDFG 2007). We subdi5, fishing zone
vided these features into three biogeographic
regions (North, South, and the Farallon
Figure 1. The zoning solutions are displayed as the frequency with which sites Islands) and three depth zones (intertidal,
are selected for an indicated zone (selection frequency) across 100 individual intertidal30 m, and 30100 m). Thirty-two
solutions and as the best solution (ie achieves targets for the least cost). (a) Zone separate biodiversity features were targeted
4 selection frequency via Marxan with Zones (Scenario 2); (b) Zone 1 selection for inclusion in a MPA.
frequency via Marxan with Zones (Scenario 2); (c) best solution via Marxan
Spatial fishing data were derived from 174
with Zones (Scenario 2); and (d) best solution via Marxan (without zoning). interviews with fishermen, conducted in
The study region is located off the northern part of Californias central coast.
2007 (Scholz et al. 2008). The surveys
attempted to capture information from at
Here, we present the first application of such a multi- least 50% of the landings and/or ex-vessel revenue from
zone numerical optimization tool to design a network of 20002006, and at least five fishermen per fishery. These
MPAs, using the objectives and zones defined by data include the value in 2006 US dollars of a given planCalifornias Marine Life Protection Act Initiative (here- ning unit to individual fishermen across eight commerafter, Initiative). We identify multiple zoning configu- cial fisheries: California halibut (CH), chinook salmon
rations for four different types of MPAs with different (CS), coastal pelagic finfish (CPF), dungeness crab (DC),
fishing restrictions and biodiversity conservation targets. deep nearshore rockfish (DNR), market squid (MS),
Our aim is to determine what, if any, socioeconomic nearshore rockfish (NR), and sea urchin (SU).
advantages can be delivered by a tool that allows for mul- Recreational fishing data were not included in our analytiple zones versus a tool that can identify only one type of sis, because high-quality, spatially explicit data for recreMPA. We also examine the tradeoffs between represent- ational fishing were unavailable.
ing biodiversity features and impacting fisheries.
Zoning
Methods
n
Marxan (Ball and Possingham 2000; Possingham et al.
2000), the most commonly used protected-area design
Policy context and planning region
tool, was modified so that it can identify solutions with
Californias Marine Life Protection Act mandates the multiple zones. We used the resulting Marxan with Zones
design of a network of MPAs. The planning team divided (Watts et al. 2009) to design a network of MPAs. We
the state waters into five regions, in which planning takes planned for five zones, each restricted to different fishplace in successive stages, from 2004 to 2011. Two eries (in parentheses below), as defined in the Initiative:
www.frontiersinecology.org

 The Ecological Society of America

CJ Klein et al.

Spatial marine zoning

(1) no-take marine reserve (all fisheries restricted); (2)
conservation area, high (CH, DC, DNR, NR, MS, SU,
CS <50 m); (3) conservation area, high/medium (CH,
DNR, NR, SU); (4) conservation area, medium (DNR,
NR, SU); and (5) commercial fishing zone (no fishing
restrictions). Marxan with Zones aims to identify a zoning configuration that achieves a set of targets for a minimum cost. To satisfy the Initiatives objective of minimizing negative socioeconomic impact, we define cost as
commercial fishing value. The cost of placing a particular
planning unit (i = 1,,M) into a particular zone (j =
1,,N) is represented by cij, which is the sum of value for
all fisheries (k = 1,,P) not allowed to fish in that zone:
P

cij =  aikbkj ,
k=1

where aik is the value of the ith planning unit to the kth
fishery, and bkj indicates if the kth fishery is not allowed to
fish in the jth zone. If the kth fishery is not allowed to fish
in the jth zone, bkj = 1; otherwise, bkj is equal to 0.
Marxan with Zones minimizes the total cost of the zoning plan (C):
M N

C =   cijxij ,
i=1 j=1

where xij = 1 if the i planning unit is included in the jth
zone, subject to the constraint that a set of zone-specific
targets and a planning unit can only be placed in one
zone, such that:

addition, we compared the results of our scenarios to
those produced using Marxan (without zoning), where
we targeted 30% of each biodiversity feature for inclusion in a no-take reserve. Given that Marxan can select
areas important for only one type of protected area, we
assume that selected areas are a cost to all fisheries. We
did not compare the results with those derived from
other systematic conservation planning tools (eg
Zonation, C-Plan), because they solve different mathematical problems.
Marxan with Zones uses a simulated annealing algorithm to identify near-optimal zoning configurations that
minimize the sum of planning unit and zone boundary
costs (Watts et al. 2009). To control for the level of fragmentation of solutions, the user can indicate the relative
importance of minimizing the boundary of the selected
areas within a zone, relative to their planning unit cost,
by adjusting a parameter called the zone boundary cost
(Watts et al. 2009). We chose a zone boundary cost for
each zone that produced solutions that represented an
acceptable tradeoff between boundary length and cost,
using a method based on that developed by Stewart and
Possingham (2005). We generated 100 different, nearoptimal solutions with different spatial configurations for
each scenario.

th

N

xij = 1 .

j=1

n Results
We compare the solutions to each scenario in terms of
impact on individual fisheries and the commercial fishery
as a whole (Figure 2). Fishing targets of up to 91% for
each fishery could be achieved, while still meeting the
biodiversity targets. This entails value losses of less than
9% for every fishery. However, in the scenario without
fishing targets (Scenario 1), three of the fisheries lost

Fishing value lost (%)

We implemented Marxan with Zones for two different
scenarios, each with different zone-specific targets
(Watts et al. 2009). In Scenario 1, we represented 10%
of the distribution of each biodiversity
Marxan
feature in a no-take reserve (Zone 1)
35
and an additional 20% in any of the
Marxan with Zones, no fishing targets
30
four protected-area zones (Zones 14).
Marxan with Zones, 91% fishing targets
(no more than 9% loss)
We evaluated the results of Scenario 1
25
to determine the proportion of lost
value overall as well as for each of the
20
fisheries. In Scenario 2, in an attempt
to more equitably affect the fisheries,
15
we also targeted a percentage of each
10
fisherys total value, where the fishing
targets could only be achieved in zones
5
where the given fishery was not
restricted. We targeted the same pro0
Coastal
Crab
Halibut Nearshore Salmon
Squid
Urchin
Total
Deep
portion for each fishery and incremenpelagics
rockfish
nearshore
rockfish
tally increased the target by 1% until
Commercial fishery
100% of the fishing grounds were
placed in a zone without spatial fishing Figure 2. Proportion of fishing value lost to each individual fishery, and the
regulations. We evaluated the results commercial fishery as a whole, in protected-area networks designed via Marxan and
of Scenario 2 to determine the trade- Marxan with Zones (with and without fishing targets). The average ( standard
offs between representing biodiversity deviation) value lost across 10 solutions that achieved the planning objectives for the
features and impacting fisheries. In least cost is displayed.
 The Ecological Society of America

www.frontiersinecology.org

351

352

Percentage of biodiversity features represented

Spatial marine zoning

30% target, Zones 1 4

100 
90

CJ Klein et al.





 10% target, Zone 1



 Not represented

80
70





as the best solution (ie achieves targets
for the least cost) to Scenario 2.

n Discussion

Zoning of the ocean has captured the
interest of many, as a means to protect bio50
diversity, manage fisheries, implement


ecosystem-based management, and plan
40
for climate change (Douvere 2008). A
30

major limitation of existing spatial plan
20



ning approaches is their inability to simul10
taneously consider different types of zones



0
with different possible uses. We demon92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
strate the first application of the multiFishery target (%)
zone planning tool, Marxan with Zones
Figure 3. Tradeoffs made between achieving the zone-specific biodiversity targets (Watts et al. 2009), to design a network of
and fishing targets for the best solution (ie the solution that achieves targets for the four types of MPAs.
least cost) to each scenario with different fishing targets. When the fishing target is
We found that a spatial numerical opti< 92%, the targets for all biodiversity features are achieved.
mization tool that allows for multiple
zones outperforms a tool that can identify
> 9% of their value, with one losing 18% of its value. marine reserves, in two ways. First, the overall impact on
Although the overall impact across the fisheries between the fishing industry is reduced. Second, there is a more
scenarios is similar (Figure 2), the addition of fishing tar- equitable impact on different fishing sectors. These
gets in Scenario 2 ensured a more equitable impact on results confirm that, for any optimization problem,
individual fisheries. As predicted, solutions produced expanding the control variables results in greater flexibilwith Marxan have greater negative impact on fisheries ity and better outcomes (Tuck and Possingham 2000;
than those produced using zoning software (Figure 2).
Grantham et al. 2008). In Marxan with Zones, the addiWhen the fishing target for each fishery is greater than tion of zones and the ability to specify certain costs and
91%, not all of the biodiversity targets can be achieved. targets for each zone are the control variables that offer
We examined the tradeoffs between achieving the zone- improved results over Marxan.
specific biodiversity targets and fishing targets for scenarMarxan with Zones can accommodate more specific
ios with different fishing targets (Figure 3). As the fishing constraints that can be applied to consider both biodivertarget is increased, the number of biodiversity features sity and socioeconomic considerations. We demonstrate
that achieve both zone-specific targets declines. If we tar- this functionality by setting two types of zone-specific
get 93% and 95% of the value for each fishery, the result- constraints: (1) biodiversity targets for MPAs and (2) fishing solution achieves its targets for 90% and 80% of the ery targets in zones where fishing is allowed for a particular
biodiversity features, respectively. If the fishing targets are fishery. We applied the software both with and without
> 96%, 1644% of the biodiversity features are not repre- fishing targets and found that the addition of fishing tarsented in a MPA.
gets produces solutions that affect the individual fishing
MPA Zones 1 and 4 are frequently selected to achieve sectors more equitably. Although a socially and politically
the planning objectives (Figure 1). Zones 2 and 3 are not favored outcome in this context (Klein et al. 2008a), this
often selected for two reasons. First, they have more fish- may not be desirable in other planning processes. Other
ing restrictions than does Zone 4, thereby making them options for setting fishing targets are to apply a different
more costly to implement; second, we did not constrain fishing target for each fishery where, for example, the tarbiodiversity targets to these zones, as was done in Zone 1. get is proportional to the overall value of the commercial
In some planning units, the cost of allocating to more fishing industry. Alternatively, targets could reflect the
than one zone is equivalent. For example, the cost of allo- minimum value needed for the fishery to remain profcating a planning unit to Zones 3 and 4 is equivalent itable, derived from population modeling that considers a
where halibut fishing does not occur. This is because the fisherys sustainability. In addition, more specific fishing
only difference between the zones is that halibut fishing is targets could be set for each fishery at each port, to better
allowed in Zone 4. In such cases, planning units have an control for the impacts to different fishing communities.
equal chance of being allocated to zones with equivalent
Our estimation of impact assumes that each MPA elimcosts. On the other hand, the selection frequency of Zone inates fishing opportunities in areas closed to specific
4 is high in areas valuable to the halibut fishery, because fisheries and that fishermen are unable to mitigate the
it is the only MPA zone that allows halibut fishing. Figure impacts in other ways. This assumption is most likely an
1 shows the selection frequency of Zones 1 and 4, as well overestimation, making our estimation of impact a worst60

www.frontiersinecology.org



 The Ecological Society of America

CJ Klein et al.

case scenario, because some fishing effort would shift to
unprotected areas (Scholz et al. 2008). Our cost (fishing
value) does not represent the true cost to fishermen and
could be improved by considering the spatial variation of
fishing costs, other fishing industries (eg recreational),
benefits of spillover (ie export of fish from inside to outside of a protected area), and redistribution of effort after
reservation (ie change in fishing location and intensity
after protected areas are implemented). This is an important area of further research, albeit one that requires substantial amounts of information on fleet behavior, fish
populations, and other dynamic parameters (Pelletier and
Mahevas 2005; Branch et al. 2006).
Designing protected areas that consider both socioeconomic and biodiversity factors has moved to the forefront
of conservation planning (Stewart and Possingham 2005;
Klein et al. 2008a). We demonstrate a method for evaluating zoning plans that shows the tradeoffs between
achieving biodiversity and fishing targets. In any planning process, tradeoffs between conservation and socioeconomic interests will be made; if these tradeoffs are not
transparent in a planning process, the result may not adequately conserve marine ecosystems. We show results for
one set of zone-specific conservation targets, although
there may be utility in analyzing tradeoffs with other targets. Our biodiversity targets do not reflect what is adequate to ensure their protection, and the result of their
application is not meant for implementation, but rather
to demonstrate novel approaches to planning for conservation.
We suggest that the use of planning tools complements,
rather than replaces, a stakeholder-driven zoning process
(Klein et al. 2008b). California will design MPAs along the
entire coast by 2011 to satisfy the states Marine Life
Protection Act. Adapting ideas from this article into the
process can help stakeholders and decision makers to
implement MPAs that balance competing socioeconomic
and biodiversity interests. Moreover, our approach is
applicable to both marine and terrestrial conservation
planning. It delivers an ecosystem-based management outcome that balances conservation and industry objectives.

n Acknowledgements
We thank the American Australian Association, the
Centre for Applied Environmental Decision Analysis,
Ecotrust, and the Resource Legacy Fund Foundation for
supporting this project.

n References

Airame S. 2005. Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary:
advancing the science and policy of marine protected areas. In:
Scholz A and Wright D (Eds). Place matters: geospatial tools for
marine science, conservation, and management in the Pacific
Northwest. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Press.
Ball IR and Possingham HP. 2000. Marxan (v 1.8.6): marine
reserve design using spatially explicit annealing. User manual.

 The Ecological Society of America

Spatial marine zoning
Brisbane, Australia: University of Queensland.
Branch TA, Hilborn R, Haynie AC, et al. 2006. Fleet dynamics and
fishermen behavior: lessons for fisheries managers. Can J Fish
Aquat Sci 63: 164768.
Bruce EM and Eliot IG. 2006. A spatial model for marine park zoning. Coastal Manage 34: 1738.
Bruner AG, Gullison RE, Rice RE, and da Fonseca GAB. 2001.
Effectiveness of parks in protecting tropical biodiversity.
Science 291: 12528.
CDFG (California Department of Fish and Game). 2007.
California Marine Life Protection Act Initiative regional profile of the north central coast study region. Sacramento, CA:
CDFG.
Douvere F. 2008. The importance of marine spatial planning in
advancing ecosystem-based sea use management. Mar Policy
32: 76271.
Fernandes L, Day J, Lewis A, et al. 2005. Establishing representative no-take areas in the Great Barrier Reef: large-scale implementation of theory on marine protected areas. Conserv Biol
19: 173344.
Grantham HS, Petersen S, and Possingham HP. 2008. Reducing
bycatch in the South African pelagic longline fishery: the utility of different approaches to fisheries closures. Endangered
Species Res 5: 29199.
Kirkpatrick JB. 1983. An iterative method for establishing priorities for the selection of nature reserves: an example from
Tasmania. Biol Conserv 25: 12734.
Klein C, Chan A, Kircher L, et al. 2008a. Striking a balance
between biodiversity conservation and socioeconomic viability
in the design of marine protected areas. Conserv Biol 22:
691700.
Klein C, Steinback C, Scholz A, et al. 2008b. Effectiveness of
marine reserve networks in representing biodiversity and minimizing impact to fishermen: a comparison of two approaches
used in California. Conser Lett 1: 4451.
Margules CR and Pressey RL. 2000. Systematic conservation planning. Nature 405: 24353.
Pelletier D and Mahevas S. 2005. Spatially explicit fisheries simulation models for policy evaluation. Fish Fish 6: 30749.
Portman ME. 2007. Zoning design for cross-border marine protected areas: the Red Sea Marine Peace Park case study. Ocean
Coast Manage 50: 499522.
Possingham HP, Ball I, and Andelman S. 2000. Mathematical
methods for identifying representative reserve networks. In:
Ferson S and Burgman M (Eds). Quantitative methods for conservation biology. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Possingham HP, Wilson KA, Andelman SJ, and Vynne CH. 2006.
Protected areas: goals, limitations, and design. In: Groom MJ,
Meffe GK, and Carroll CR (Eds). Principles of conservation
biology. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates Inc.
Scholz A, Steinback C, Kruse S, et al. 2008. Commercial fishing
grounds and their relative importance off the north central
coast of California. Portland, OR: Ecotrust.
Soul ME. 1991. Conservation: tactics for a constant crisis. Science
253: 74450.
Stewart RR and Possingham HP. 2005. Efficiency, costs and tradeoffs in marine reserve system design. Environ Model Assess 10:
20313.
Tuck GN and Possingham HP. 2000. Marine protected areas for
spatially structured exploited stocks. Mar EcolProg Ser 192:
89101.
Villa F, Tunsei L, and Agardy T. 2002. Zoning marine protected
areas through spatial multiple-criteria analysis: the case of the
Asinara Island National Marine Reserve of Italy. Conserv Biol
16: 51526.
Watts M, Possingham HP, Ball I, et al. 2009. Marxan with Zones:
software for optimal conservation-based land- and sea-use zoning. Environ Modell Softw 24: 151321.

www.frontiersinecology.org

353

