See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/200109414

The Integrated Coral Observing Network: Sensor Solutions for Sensitive Sites
Conference Paper  January 2007
DOI: 10.1109/ISSNIP.2007.4496923

CITATIONS

READS

10

127

6 authors, including:
J. Hendee

Lew Gramer

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

University of Miami

34 PUBLICATIONS 1,299 CITATIONS

24 PUBLICATIONS 494 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Joan Kleypas

Derek P Manzello

National Center for Atmospheric Research

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

98 PUBLICATIONS 21,122 CITATIONS

118 PUBLICATIONS 3,563 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Effect of temperature and CO2 on coral physiology View project

Indonesian ARLINDO Mixing View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Lew Gramer on 30 July 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

The Integrated Coral Observing Network:
Sensor Solutions for Sensitive Sites
#James C. Hendee1, Lew Gramer2, J.A. Kleypas3, Derek Manzello2, Mike Jankulak2, Chris Langdon4
1

Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
4301 Rickenbacker Causeway; Miami, FL 33149, USA; Jim.Hendee@noaa.gov
2
Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies, Rosenstiel School for Marine and Atmospheric Science,
University of Miami, Miami FL, 33149, USA
Lew.Gramer@noaa.gov, DManzello@rsmas.miami.edu, M.Jankulak@miami.edu
3
National Center for Atmospheric Research,
Boulder CO 80307 USA, kleypas@ucar.edu
4
Rosenstiel School for Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami
Miami FL, 33149, USA, CLangdon@rsmas.miami.edu
Abstract

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations
(NOAA) Integrated Coral Observing Network (ICON), has
been operational since 2000 and works closely with most US
Government and many international environmental partners
involved in coral reef research. The ICON program has
pioneered the use of artificial intelligence techniques to
assess near real-time data streams from environment sensor
networks such as the SEAKEYS Network (Florida Keys), the
Australia Institute of Marine Science Weather Network,
NOAA's Coral Reef Ecosystem Division network in the
Pacific, and its own Integrated Coral Observing Network
(ICON) of stations in the Caribbean. Besides its innovative
approach to coral monitoring station deployments, the ICON
program recently pioneered techniques for the near real-time
integration of satellite, in situ and radar data sources for
purposes of ecological forecasting of such events as coral
bleaching, coral spawning, upwelling and other marine
behavioral or physical oceanographic events. The ICON
program has also ushered in the use of Pulse-AmplitudeModulating fluorometry to measure near real-time
physiological recording of response to environmental stress
during coral bleaching, thus providing even better ecological
forecasting capabilities through artificial intelligence and
data integrative techniques. Herewith, we describe these
techniques, along with a report on new coral calcification
instrumentation augmenting the ICON Network sensor array.
1.

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

Through continuous data collection and real-time monitoring,
the ICON Program, located at NOAA's Atlantic
Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory (AOML) in
Miami, Florida, provides scientists and Marine Protected
Area (MPA) managers with data critical to understanding the
complex physical, chemical, and biological processes
influencing coral reef ecosystems.
ICON stations are
currently installed at North Normans Reef near the Island of
Exuma, Bahamas; at Salt River, St. Croix in the U.S. Virgin

Islands; at La Parguera, Puerto Rico; and at Discovery Bay,
Jamaica, with plans for additional stations in the Caribbean,
Pacific and Indo-Pacific regions.
The project continues to focus its efforts in two primary areas:
(1) integration of data and the ability to draw automated, realtime inferences about ecological and physical events on the
basis of those data; and, (2) continued deployment of new
stations, and maintenance of existing stations and in situ
sensors, based on a continually evolving structural hardware
design that offers incrementally increased stability and
reliability of the instrumentation at each new (or updated)
study site [1]. Data are analyzed from partner environmental
sensor networks besides the ICON Network, including the
SEAKEYS Network (Florida Keys), the Australia Institute of
Marine Science Weather Network, NOAA's Coral Reef
Ecosystem Division network in the Pacific, and various
"virtual sites" (i.e., latitude/longitude pair data gained via
satellite) in all three oceans.
A new (over previous efforts; [2,3]) robust expert system
shell called G2 (Gensym, Inc.) now combines station
observations from instruments such as pCO2 sensors, multispectral
light
instruments,
temperature
loggers,
meteorological and hydrographic instruments and others,
together with data from satellite sensors including MODIS,
AVHRR, AMSR-E, TRMM and QuickSCAT, as well as data
from other remote sensing systems such as ocean surface
currents derived from Wellen Radar (WERA)
HighFrequency radar operated by the University of Miami's
Rosenstiel School for Marine and Atmospheric Sciences. The
resulting high-resolution, near real-time integrated data
streams are used to predict conditions conducive to coral
bleaching events, upwelling and other hydrodynamic events
affecting ecosystem productivity, as well as reproductive
activities of corals and other reef organisms.
These
ecological forecasts ("ecoforecasts") are then distributed via
email to researchers and via the ICON/G2 Ecoforecast
Website [4]. Continuous baseline data collection, combined
with real-time monitoring tools allow scientists, modellers

1

and managers to understand the processes that drive coral reef
ecosystems and provide the necessary information to properly
manage and protect these unique and valuable natural
resources. Many US governmental and international partners
are involved in this ongoing research effort.
2.

DATA INTEGRATION FOR ECOLOGICAL FORECASTING

A. Computing Architecture
The ICON computing architecture makes use of four main
servers: Web hosting, applications, database and mail. The
servers run supported versions of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 4
and 5 and are updated regularly with security patches. The
database server houses an Oracle database. The Apache web
server and the G2 server are each installed within isolated
chroot jail environments to minimize the impact of any
possible server compromise, and all systems are kept behind
the AOML firewall with access limited to a small subset of
ports and, in many cases, originating Internet Protocol
addresses. All four systems are provided with redundant
power supplies, a hurricane plan and daily backup support.
The G2 server interfaces with the Web server via Gensyms
G2-WebLink bridge, and interfaces with the database server
via the G2-Oracle Bridge. Data from the ICON stations are
collected within minutes of each hourly satellite transmission
and are uploaded to the G2 server. From there, they are
propagated into the Oracle database for archival and reporting
purposes, and hourly transmission reports are sent directly to
the Web server, as well. Once a day, 72 hours worth of data
is processed by the ICON programs original C Language
Integrated Production Systems (CLIPS) routines [2] and
summarized as sensor facts. These facts, which are the raw
material of the expert system's ecological forecasts, are
uploaded to the G2 server, which creates its own set of sensor
facts, some as a check on the facts output by CLIPS and some
additional facts not supported by the CLIPS routines.
A subset of sensor data is also shared with AOMLs
Hurricane Research Division for forecasting purposes, and a
new data feed will soon make ICON data available at the
National Data Buoy Center and be incorporated into the U.S.
National Weather Service operational data stream.
B. Data Integration
A group of collaborators from around the world work with the
ICON project by supplying near real-time data from in situ
networks (e.g., the SEAKEYS Network, the AIMS Weather
Network, etc.), satellite and radar data. These data are either
acquired through automated uploads or downloads, or through
the use of scripting techniques to acquire values posted on
partner Web sites. Where possible, the in situ data are
matched with latitude and longitude pixel data from satellites,
and in some cases with WERA radar data, at matching dates
and times for output to the ecoforecasting Web site mentioned
previously. Where in situ monitoring stations are not located,
virtual sites are monitored using satellite data for wind, sea

temperature and other conditions of interest to ecological
forecasting. In all cases, simple tabular output via the Web of
integrated data is available hourly and/or daily for those who
wish to conduct their own research. The integration of data
for various purposes is a stated goal of the U.S. Commission
on Ocean Policy as part of its Integrated Ocean Observing
System (U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy, 2004, Ch. 26
[5]), of which NOAA has taken the lead in management
authority. The ICON Program is one of the leaders in data
integration and marine ecological forecasting.
Improving on previous efforts to apply artificial intelligence
to ecological forecasting [2], data quality control, analysis and
ecosystem modelling for the ICON Program are performed
automatically by a software system known as ICON/G2,
developed at NOAA using the commercial G2 expert-systems
platform. G2 allows a scientific programmer to implement
artificial intelligence applications, using object oriented
design and a combination of natural- and visual-language
programming tools. Monitoring sites, instrument packages
and individual environmental sensors at a site are all
represented in ICON/G2 by appropriate class definitions.
The ICON/G2 system thus serves as a platform for integration
of environmental data from many sources, at each of
hundreds of monitored reef sites globally. The ICON/G2
system then utilizes the rule-based inferencing capabilities of
the G2 expert systems platform to implement data quality
control on integrated data streams. Value range checks and
sensor cross-comparisons provide email and online alerts in
near real-time whenever sensors report apparently anomalous
values.
C. Ecological Forecasting
The ultimate goal of creating ecological forecast models
based on these near real-time integrated, quality-controlled
data streams is also encompassed by the ICON/G2 system.
Ecological forecasts predict the impacts of physical,
chemical, biological, and human-induced change on
ecosystems and their components [6]. Within coral reef
ecosystems, the best examples of ecological forecasts are
coral bleaching alerts (based on high sea temperatures [7]),
and coral spawning (based on moon phase and sea
temperatures [8]). However, research shows that light is
involved in chronic photo-inhibition within the symbiotic
relationship (resulting in bleaching), and is the underlying
mechanism of thermally-induced bleaching [9]. Also, recent
research [10] shows that accumulating hours of daylight
appear to play a role in spawning, at least in some species.
Thus, the ICON Program is delving further into the complex
interactions of physical parameters that govern coral
ecosystem response, utilizing the wider sources of data that
are now available through data integration techniques.
Table 1 displays several ecoforecasting models that the ICON
Program is currently advancing.

2

3.

PHYSIOLOGICAL MONITORING OF CORAL STRESS

Researchers of coral reef ecosystems now recognize that
mass coral bleaching, (i.e., the loss of coral color due to mass
expulsion of their endosymbiotic zooxanthellae), is primarily
due to the presence of extended exposure to high sea
temperatures [11] . However, as mentioned above, light has a
significant and fundamental role in the response.
One line of research that has elucidated this physiological
process utilizes a Pulse-Amplitude-Modulating (PAM)
fluorometer (a PAM) to detect photosynthetic efficiency of
the zooxanthellae through night-time fluorescence, and
although some keystone work has been done on this in the
past [8], there had never been a continuous measuring of the
physiological response coincident with comprehensive
monitoring of the physical environment to better understand
the ecological drivers. Such an approach is fundamental to
understanding the processes that are now causing stress and
mortality to corals globally [12].
To pursue the applicability of this approach, a specially
constructed PAM was deployed on the ICON station near Lee
Stocking Island, Exuma, Bahamas, for monitoring two
species of corals, Siderastrea siderea and Agaricia tenuifolia,
during summer, 2005. The PAM utilized was manufactured
by Gademann Instruments, Inc. of Belgium and consisted of a
central canister with four light guns connected to the central
canister by 7m cables. The canister itself was connected to
the station data logger via a cable running from the top of the
station, down through and out the side of the pylon, and then
out to the two target species of corals. The nature of PAMfluorometry requires that the light gun be positioned a fixed
distance from the target species, so specially constructed
holders held the guns firmly against the strong local currents
and were positioned utilizing a special spacer. Every hour,
each light gun emitted a series of light flashes of 0.6 sec
duration.
Results obtained through the summer, 2005 coral
bleaching incidence indicated that chronic photo-inhibition
was sustained beginning August 3, 2005. These data indicate
that the endosymbionts of the of S. siderea colony began
undergoing biochemical damage responsible for bleaching
over a month prior to the issuing of satellite-based bleaching
alerts, and thus show promise for a better understanding of
the multiple and interacting physical factors involved in coral
bleaching [13].
4.

OCEAN ACIDIFICATION STUDIES

Ocean acidification has become increasingly recognized as an
important consequence of increasing atmospheric carbon
dioxide (CO2) concentration [14,15,16,17]. Ocean
acidification refers to the progressive decrease in seawater pH
due to the oceans absorption of much of the excess CO2
emitted into the atmosphere from fossil fuel burning.

Laboratory studies illustrate that corals and other reefbuilding organisms are particularly susceptible to the changes
in seawater carbonate chemistry associated with decreasing
pH, because they cause a reduction in calcification rates
(skeletal building through precipitation of calcium carbonate)
by up to 50% by the middle of this century [18,19]. Because
calcium carbonate production is the base process of reef
building, these changes not only threaten reef organisms, but
entire reef structures and the ecosystems they support [20].
These revelations are relatively new, however, and field
studies of coral reef response to changing seawater carbonate
chemistry have been few and limited in scope. Field research
of carbonate chemistry and calcification rates on coral reefs is
challenging for a few important reasons. First, measurements
of the carbonate system in seawater are difficult to do. At
least four measurements must be obtained: temperature,
salinity, and two of the following: total dissolved inorganic
carbon (DIC), partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2), pH, and total
alkalinity (TA) [21]. Second, the carbonate system on coral
reefs is highly variable both temporally and spatially, mainly
because of the direct effect that coral reef metabolism
(calcification, dissolution, photosynthesis, and respiration)
has on reef water chemistry [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. Seawater
carbonate chemistry can thus change hourly and will vary at
the scale of tens of meters. This is further complicated by the
complex hydrodynamic environment of reefs, where currents,
waves, and winds can strongly affect the carbonate system as
well as the organisms changing it!
The ICON field stations provide an ideal platform for
examining the effects of ocean acidification on reefs because
they provide high-resolution data of temperature, salinity,
winds, and a suite of other variables that are relevant to
carbonate chemistry research, along with other data that
directly relate to the metabolic state of the coral reef
community.
To further support ocean acidification studies, the ICON
Program has supplemented their stations with several
important sensors. Over the past two years, automated pCO2
sensors (Submersible Autonomous Moored Instrument or
SAMI by Sunburst Sensors, LLC) have been installed at
stations of the ICON network. SAMIs have been deployed in
the Bahamas, the Florida Keys, Puerto Rico and Jamaica, and
data are now included in the near-real-time suite of data
provided via the ICON Web site. Recently, one of us (CL)
has deployed a second automated sensor to measure pH at the
La Parguera site, thus completing the suite of measurements
needed to completely characterize seawater chemistry
changes at this reef site.
These ICON-based high resolution and long-term data
provide a foundation of field measurements to support future,
integrated research on the effects of ocean acidification on
coral reefs. The stations are thus ideal sites to fully
characterize the carbonate system on a coral reef. These

3

enable research projects that integrate hydrographic
measurements and modelling, and direct measurements of
coral calcification rates and other metabolic parameters that
are badly needed if we are to understand the full
5.

biogeochemical and ecological responses of coral reef
ecosystems to ocean acidification.
.

TABLE 1.

A Summary of Integrated Coral Observing Network Operational and Developmental Ecological Forecasts.
Name

Description

Application

Model variables

Scale

Assumptions

Coral stress

Recognizes potential
physical stressors
capable of causing
coral bleaching

Decision support for
MPA managers;
research in coral
biology and ecology.

From 3 h
to 150 d

Thermal stress leading to coral
bleaching can be modified by
other factors (i.e., light, wind,
wave action, water clarity)

Coral spawning

Recognizes potential
physical cues for coral
spawning

From 3 h
to 90 d

Fish spawning
aggregation

Recognizes potential
physical cues for
spawning
aggregations

From 1 d
to 14 d

Recognizes
hydrodynamic events
that may be
ecologically important

Data quality

Recognizes out-ofrange or mutually
inconsistent data that
may indicate sensor
disturbance

Sea temperature, light
(PAR), tidal height,
onshore currents and
internal wave breaking,
lunar phase.
Sea temperature, wind
speed and direction,
chlorophyll a (from
satellite or in situ
measurements); model is
also refined by current
data (e.g., ADCP or
radar surface returns)
where available
Any

Local environmental conditions
(in addition to lunar phase) may
be important in the timing of
spawning
Local environmental conditions
(in addition to lunar phase) may
be important in the timing of
spawning

Hydrodynamic
anomaly

Decision support for
MPA managers;
research in coral
biology and ecology.
Decision support for
MPA managers;
research in
reproductive biology
and ecology.
Water quality and
coastal resource
management;
research in nutrient
dynamics and larval
recruitment.

Sea temperature; light
[sea surface and subsurface light 
Photosynthetically Active
Radiation (400-700nm),
UV-A and UV-B]; wind
speed; tidal height.
Sea temperature, light
(PAR), lunar phase.

6.

Quality control of
data feeds

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

NOAAs Coral Reef Conservation Program, and the High
Performance Computing and Communications office are
gratefully acknowledged for support of the ICON Project
and related research. The authors thank M. Shoemaker, J.
Craynock, N. Ash, H. Casanova, J. Halas, L. Florit, C.
Jeffris, E. Roque-Rodriguez, J. Tomczuk, K. Puglise and
others for their work on the ICON Project.
7.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Hendee, E. Stabenau, L. Florit, D. Manzello, C.
Jeffris. Infrastructure and capabilities of a near real-time
meteorological and oceanographic in situ instrumented
array, and its role in marine environmental decision
support. In: Richardson, L.L., and E.F. LeDrew, Editors,
Remote sensing of aquatic coastal ecosystem processes.
Kluwer Academic Press, pp 135-156, 2006.

From 12 h
to 30 d

Environmental indicators (i.e.,
wind, chlorophyll a, variance in
sea temperature etc.) are
sufficient to distinguish
anomalous water properties as
being caused by wind forcing,
frontal / topographic interaction,
or local nutrient load

Hourly to
monthly

Sensor drift and malfunction
can be identified by values
outside of predefined range,
combined with inter-comparison
of values from similar sensors

[2] J. Hendee. An expert system for marine environmental
monitoring in the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary
and Florida Bay. Proceedings, 2nd International
Conference on the Coastal Environment, Cancun, Mexico,
September 8-10, 1998. Computational Mechanics
Publications/WIT Press, Southampton, 57-66, 1998.
[3] J. Hendee, E. Mueller, C. Humphrey, and T. Moore. A
data-driven expert system for producing coral bleaching
alerts at Sombrero Reef in the Florida Keys. Bulletin of
Marine Science, 69(2):673-684. (Presented at the National
Coral Reef Institute's International Conference on
Scientific Aspects of Coral Reef Assessment, Monitoring,
and Restoration. Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, April 14-16,
1999; 2001.
[4] http://ecoforecast.coral.noaa.gov.
[5] An Ocean Blueprint for the 21st Century: Final Report
of the U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy, 2004. Available
online as of August 15, 2007 at:
http://www.oceancommission.gov/documents

4

[6] Committee on Environmental and Natural Resources
[CENR]. Ecological Forecasting, Washington, D.C., 12
pp., 2001.
[7] G. Liu, W. Skirving, and A. E. Strong. Remote sensing
of sea surface temperatures during 2002 Barrier Reef coral
bleaching. Eos, 84(15), 137-144; 2003.
[8] P. L. Harrison, R. C. Babcock, G. D. Bull, J. K. Oliver, C. C.
Wallace, and B. L. Willis. Mass spawning in tropical reef
corals. Science, 223, 11861189; 1984.
[9] M. E. Warner, W. K. Fitt, G. W. Schmidt. Damage to
photosystem II in symbiotic dinoflagellates: A determinant
of coral bleaching. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 80078012; 1999.
[10] R. van Woesik, F. Lacharmoise, and S. Koksal.
Annual cycles of solar insolation predict spawning times
of Caribbean corals, Ecol. Lett., 9, 390-398; 2006.

[18] J.A. Kleypas and C. Langdon. Coral reefs and
changing seawater chemistry, in Coral Reefs and Climate
Change: Science and Management, edited by J. T.
Phinney, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, J. Kleypas, W. Skirving and
A. Strong, pp. 73-110, Am. Geophys. Union, Washington,
DC; 2006.
[19] C. Langdon, W. S. Broecker, D. E. Hammond, E.
Glenn, K. Fitsimmons, S. G. Nelson, T. H. Peng, I. Hajdas,
and G. Bonani. Effect of elevated CO2 on the community
metabolism of an experimental coral reef, Global
Biogeochem. Cycles, 17, art. no. 1011; 2003.
[20] J. A. Kleypas, R. W. Buddemeier, and J.-P. Gattuso.
The future of coral reefs in an age of global change, Int. J.
Earth Sci., 90, 426-437; 2001.
[21] R. E. Zeebe and D. Wolf-Gladrow. CO2 in Seawater:
Equlibrium, Kinetics, Isotopes, 346 pp., Elsevier Science,
B.V., Amsterdam; 2001.

[11] P. W. Glynn. Coral reef bleaching: ecological
consequences. Coral Reefs, 12, 1-17; 1993.

[22] N. R. Bates.. Seasonal variability of the effect of coral
reefs on seawater CO2 and air-sea CO2 exchange, Limnol.
Oceanogr., 47, 43-52; 2002.

[12] W. K. Fitt, B. E. Brown, M .E. Warner, R. P. Dunne.
Coral bleaching: interpretation of thermal tolerance limits
and thermal thresholds in tropical corals. Coral Reefs 20:
51-65; 2001.

[23] N. R. Bates, L. Samuels, and L. Merlivat.
Biogeochemical and physical factors influencing seawater
CO2, and air-sea CO2 exchange on the Bermuda coral
reef, Limnol. Oceanogr., 46, 833-846; 2001.

[13] J. C. Hendee, D. Manzello, E. Stabenau, M. Lesser,
M. Warner, and M. Jankulak. Remote, hourly
physiological monitoring of two corals during the summer,
2005 bleaching event at Lee Stocking Island, Exuma,
Bahamas. In prep.

[24] J.-P. Gattuso, M. Frankignoulle, and R. Wollast.
Photosynthesis and calcification at cellular, organismal
and community levels in coral reefs: A review on
interactions and control by carbonate chemistry, Am.
Zool., 39, 160-183; 1999.

[14] R.A. Feely, C. L. Savine, K. Lee, W. Berelson, J.
Kleypas, V. J Fabry, and F. J. Millero. Impact of
anthropogenic CO2 on the CaCO3 system in the oceans,
Science, 305, 362-366; 2004.

[25] J.-P. Gattuso, M. Pichon, B. Delesalle, and M.
Frankignoulle. Community metabolism and air-sea CO2
fluxes in a coral reef ecosystem (Moorea, FrenchPolynesia), Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 96, 259-267; 1993.

[15] J. C. Orr, V. J. Fabry, O. Aumont, L. Bopp, S. C.
Doney, R. A. Feely, A. Gnanadesikan, N. Gruber, A.
Ishida, F. Joos, R. M. Key, K. Lindsay, E. Maier-Reimer,
R. Matear, P. Monfray, A. Mouchet, R. G. Najjar, G. K.
Plattner, K. B. Rodgers, C. L. Sabine, J. L. Sarmiento, R.
Schlitzer, R. D. Slater, I. J. Totterdell, M. F. Weirig, Y.
Yamanaka, A. Yool. Anthropogenic ocean acidification
over the twenty-first century and its impact on calcifying
organisms, Nature, 437, 681-686; 2005.

[26] K. Kawahata, A. Suzuki, and K. Goto. Coral reef
ecosystems as a source of atmospheric CO2: evidence from
PCO2 measurements of surface waters, Coral Reefs, 16,
261-266; 1997.
[27] H. Kayanne, A. Suzuki, and H. Saito. Diurnal changes
in the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in coral reef
water, Science, 269, 214-216; 1995.

[16] Royal Society. Ocean acidification due to increasing
atmospheric carbon dioxide, 223 pp, The Royal Society,
London; 2005.
[17] Ruttiman, J. Sick Seas, Nature, 442, 978-980; 2006.

5

View publication stats

