Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth Series

Harnessing Artificial
Intelligence for the Earth

In Collaboration with PwC and Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment
January 2018

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for
the Earth is published by the World
Economic Forum System Initiative on
Shaping the Future of Environment
and Natural Resource Security in
partnership with PwC and the Stanford
Woods Institute for the Environment. It
was made possible with funding from
the MAVA Foundation.
About the Fourth Industrial
Revolution for the Earth series
The Fourth Industrial Revolution
for the Earth is a publication series
highlighting opportunities to solve the
worlds most pressing environmental
challenges by harnessing technological
innovations supported by new and
effective approaches to governance,
financing and multistakeholder
collaboration.
About the World Economic Forum
The World Economic Forum,
committed to improving the state of the
world, is the international organization
for public-private cooperation. The
Forum engages the foremost business,
political and other leaders of society
to shape global, regional and industry
agendas.

World Economic Forum
 2018  All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or
Transmitted in any form or by any means, including
Photocopying and recording, or by any information Storage
and retrieval system.
REF 030118

Contents

Preface
The Fourth Industrial Revolution and
the Earth

3

Preface: The Fourth Industrial
Revolution and the Earth

4

Foreword

5

Our planet: The challenge and
opportunity

Industrialization has led to many of the worlds current environmental problems.
For example, climate change, unsafe levels of air pollution, the depletion of fishing
stocks, toxins in rivers and soils, overflowing levels of waste on land and in the
ocean, loss of biodiversity and deforestation can all be traced to industrialization.

7

5

The challenge

5

The opportunity

6

AI for the Earth

The AI revolution
7

Why now?

7

AI capabilities: Past, present
and future

9

The AI opportunity for our
environment

12

AI game changers for the Earth

As the Fourth Industrial Revolution gathers pace, innovations are becoming
faster, more efficient and more widely accessible than before. Technology is also
becoming increasingly connected; in particular we are seeing a merging of digital,
physical and biological realms. New technologies are enabling societal shifts
by having an effect on economics, values, identities and possibilities for future
generations.
We have a unique opportunity to harness this Fourth Industrial Revolution, and
the societal shifts it triggers, to help address environmental issues and redesign
how we manage our shared global environment. The Fourth Industrial Revolution
could, however, also exacerbate existing threats to environmental security or
create entirely new risks that will need to be considered and managed.

18

AI unguided: Unintended
consequences for the Earth

Harnessing these opportunities and proactively managing these risks will
require a transformation of the enabling environment, namely the governance
frameworks and policy protocols, investment and financing models, the
prevailing incentives for technology development, and the nature of societal
engagement. This transformation will not happen automatically. It will require
proactive collaboration between policymakers, scientists, civil society, technology
champions and investors.

20

Conclusion and recommendations

If we get it right, it could create a sustainability revolution.

12 Emerging AI game changers
15 Further-off AI game changers

20 Conclusion
20 Recommendations
23

Acknowledgements

24

Annex 1: Glossary of AI terms

25

Annex 2: The Fourth Industrial
Revolution for the Earth

26

Endnotes

This Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth series is designed to illustrate
the potential of Fourth Industrial Revolution innovations and their application to
the worlds most pressing environmental challenges. It offers insights into the
emerging opportunities and risks, and highlights the roles various actors could
play to ensure these technologies are harnessed and scaled effectively. It is not
intended to be conclusive, but rather to stimulate a discussion between diverse
stakeholders to provide a foundation for further collaborative work. This paper
looks at artificial intelligence and the Earth.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

3

Foreword
The proliferation of artificial intelligence (AI) is having a significant impact on society, changing the
way we work, live and interact. AI today is helping the world diagnose diseases and develop clinical
pathways. It is also being used to adapt lesson plans for students with different learning needs.
Elsewhere, AI is matching individuals skill sets and aptitudes with job openings. However, as AI acts
increasingly more autonomously and becomes broader in its use, AI safety will become even more
important. Commonly discussed risks include bias, poor decision-making, low transparency, job
losses and malevolent use of AI (e.g. autonomous weaponry).

Celine Herweijer
Partner, PwC UK,
Innovation and
Sustainability
Leader

Dominic
Waughray
Head of
Public-Private
Partnership
and Member of
the Executive
Committee,
World Economic
Forum

4

Developing approaches to guide human-friendly AI is arguably one of the biggest unsolved AI
problems today. As the scale of the economic and human health impacts from our deteriorating
natural environment grows, it is becoming increasingly important to extend the rapidly growing
field of AI safety to incorporate Earth-friendly AI. As the technology evolves, its direct and
indirect applications for the environment will need to be better understood in order to harness the
opportunities, while assessing the potential risks and developing approaches for mitigating them. For
example, AI could be developed to support the creation of distributed, off-grid water and energy
resources; to improve climate modelling; or to improve natural disaster resilience planning. Ongoing
cooperation among governments, technology developers, investors and civil society will be essential
to realizing this vision. As AI is the electricity for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, harnessing its
potential could help to create sustainable, beneficial outcomes for humanity and the planet we inhabit.
As this report shows, the AI opportunity for the Earth is significant. Todays AI explosion will see us add
AI to more and more things every year. The AI itself will also become smarter with each passing year 
not only more productive but developing intelligence that humans dont yet have, accelerating human
learning and innovation. As we think about the gains, efficiencies and new solutions this creates
for nations, business and for everyday life, we must also think about how to maximize the gains for
society and our environment at large.
We live in exciting times: it is now possible to tackle some of the worlds biggest problems with
emerging technologies such as AI. Its time to put AI to work for the planet.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

Our planet: The challenge and opportunity
The challenge
There is mounting scientific consensus that Earth systems
are under unprecedented stress. The model of human and
economic development developed during past industrial
revolutions has largely come at the expense of the planet.
For 10,000 years, the Earths relative stability has enabled
civilizations to thrive. However, in a short space of time,
industrialization has put this stability at risk.
Scientists have identified nine processes and systems (that)
regulate the stability and resilience of the Earth System,
and say four of the nine  climate change, loss of biosphere
integrity, land-system change and altered cycles in the
globes chemistry  have now crossed boundary levels,
due to human activity.1 This elevates the risk that human
activities will lead to deterioration of human well-being in
many parts of the world, including wealthy countries.
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals provide
another lens for the challenges facing humanity. Six of the
17 goals apply directly to the environment and humans
influence over it: combating climate change, using ocean
and marine resources wisely, managing forests, combating
desertification, reversing land degradation, developing
sustainable cities and providing clean affordable energy.2
This report uses these two lenses to illuminate six critical
challenges that demand transformative action in the 21st
century:
 Climate change. Todays greenhouse gas levels may be
the highest in 3 million years.3 If current Paris Agreement
pledges are kept, global average temperatures in 2100
are still expected to be 3C above pre-industrial levels,4
well above the targets to avoid the worst impacts of
climate change.
 Biodiversity and conservation. The Earth is losing its
biodiversity at mass extinction rates. One in five species
on Earth now faces eradication, and scientists estimate
that this will rise to 50% by the end of the century unless
we take urgent action.5 Current deforestation rates in
the Amazon Basin could lead to an 8% drop in regional
rainfall by 2050, triggering a shift to a savannah state,
with wider consequences for the Earths atmospheric
circulatory systems.6
 Healthy oceans. The chemistry of the oceans is
changing more rapidly than at any time in perhaps
300 million years, as the water absorbs anthropogenic
greenhouse gases.7 The resulting ocean acidification and
warming are leading to unprecedented damage to fish
stocks and corals.8

 Water security. By 2030, we may fall 40% short of the
amount of fresh water needed to support the global
economy9 as pollution and climate change affect the
global water cycle.
 Clean air. Around 92% of the worlds people live in
places that fail to meet World Health Organization (WHO)
air quality guidelines.10 The WHO has reported that
around 7 million people die annually from exposure to air
pollution  one death out of every eight globally.11
 Weather and disaster resilience. In 2016 the world
suffered 772 geophysical, meteorological, hydrological
and climatological natural loss events  triple the
number in suffered in 1980.12
Taken together, these six issues pose an urgent global
challenge. As the worlds current population of around
7 billion grows to 9.8 billion by 2050, it will increase the
demand for food, materials, transport, and energy, further
increasing the risk of environmental degradation and
affecting human health, livelihoods, and security. Can
humanity preserve the planet for future generations?

The opportunity
While these challenges are urgent and unprecedented,
they coincide with an era of unprecedented innovation and
technological change. The Fourth Industrial Revolution
offers unparalleled opportunities to overcome these new
challenges.13
This industrial revolution, unlike previous ones, is
underpinned by the established digital economy and is
based on rapid advances in artificial intelligence, the Internet
of Things, robots, autonomous vehicles, biotechnology,
nanotechnology and quantum computing, among others.14
It is characterized by the combination of these technologies,
which are increasing speed, intelligence and efficiency gains.
This report focuses on AI  the fundamental and most
pervasive emerging technology of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution. AI is a term for computer systems that can
sense their environment, think, learn, and act in response to
what they sense and their programmed objectives.
Of all the Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies, AI
is expected to have the deepest impact, permeating all
industries and playing an increasing role in daily life. By
combining with other new technologies, AI is becoming the
electricity of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, as innovators
embed intelligence into more devices, applications and
interconnected systems. Beyond productivity gains, AI also
promises to enable humans to develop intelligence not yet
reached, opening the door to new discoveries.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

5

AI is already transforming traditional industries and everyday
lives. New breakthroughs powered by AI often dont work
alone but in combination with other Fourth Industrial
Revolution technologies.15 As entrepreneurs, businesses,
investors, and governments look to deploy and scale these
technologies to create strategic advantage, there are also
important opportunities to apply them to todays immediate
and pressing Earth challenges and to generate opportunities
for today and the future.

AI for the Earth
Although AI presents transformative opportunities to
address the Earths environmental challenges, left unguided,
it also has the capability to accelerate the environments
degradation.
The focus of this report is on harnessing AI systems today,
and as they evolve, to create maximum positive impact on
urgent environmental challenges. It suggests ways in which
AI can help transform traditional sectors and systems to
address climate change, deliver food and water security,
protect biodiversity and bolster human well-being. This
concern is tightly linked with the emerging question of how
to ensure that AI does not become harmful to human wellbeing.
To develop safe AI, the ultimate goal is to ensure that it
becomes value-aligned  that its idea of a good future is
aligned with humanitys values, promising safe application of
the technology for humankind. In practice, this means that
checks and balances developed to ensure that evolving AI
systems remain friendly must incorporate the health of the
natural environment as a fundamental dimension.

6

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

The AI revolution
Why now?
The first practical steps towards artificial intelligence were
taken in the 1940s. Today, AI is in use in our daily lives and
has reached a historical moment because of six converging
factors:
 Big data: Computers have given us access to vast
amounts of data, both structured (in databases and
spreadsheets) and unstructured (such as text, audio,
video and images). All of this data documents our lives
and improves humans understanding of the world. As
trillions of sensors are deployed in appliances, packages,
clothing, autonomous vehicles and elsewhere, big
data will only get bigger. AI-assisted processing of
this information allows us to use this data to discover
historical patterns, predict more efficiently, make more
effective recommendations, and more.
 Processing power: Accelerating technologies such as
cloud computing and graphics processing units have
made it cheaper and faster to handle large volumes
of data with complex AI-empowered systems through
parallel processing. In the future, deep learning chips
 a key focus of research today  will push parallel
computation further.
 A connected globe: Social media platforms have
fundamentally changed how individuals interact. This
increased connectivity has accelerated the spread of
information and encouraged the sharing of knowledge,
leading to the emergence of a collective intelligence,
including open-source communities developing AI tools
and sharing applications.
 Open-source software and data: Open-source
software and data are accelerating the democratization
and use of AI, as can be seen in the popularity of opensource machine learning standards and platforms such
as TensorFlow, Caffe2, PyTorch and Parl.ai. An opensource approach can mean less time spent on routine
coding, industry standardization and wider application of
emerging AI tools.
 Improved algorithms: Researchers have made
advances in several aspects of AI, particularly in deep
learning, which involves layers of neural networks,
designed in a fashion inspired by the human brains
approach to processing information. Another emerging
area of research is deep reinforcement in which the AI
agent learns with little or no initial input data, by trial and
error optimized by a reward function.

 Accelerating returns: Competitive pressures have
fuelled the rise of AI, as businesses have used improved
algorithms and open-source software to boost their
competitive advantage and augment their returns
through, for example, increasing personalization of
consumer products or utilizing intelligent automation to
increase their productivity.
The convergence of these factors has helped AI move
from in vitro (in research labs) to in vivo (in everyday lives).
Established corporations and start-ups alike can now
pioneer AI advances and applications. Indeed, many people
are already using AI-infused systems, whether they realize
it or not, to navigate cities, shop online, find entertainment
recommendations, filter out unwanted emails or share a
journey to work.
AI is already here, then, and many corporate executives
perceive its potential value. In a 2017 PwC survey of global
executives, 54% reported making substantial investments
in AI, while a lack of digital skills remains an important
concern.16 As organizations continue to invest in tools,
data optimization, people, and AI-enabled innovations, the
realized values are expected to take off: growing from $1.4
billion in annual revenue from AI-enabled systems in 2016 to
$59.8 billion by 2025, according to one research study.17

AI capabilities: past, present and future
The spectrum of AI is also expanding and now includes:
 Automated intelligence systems that take repeated,
labour-intensive tasks requiring intelligence, and
automatically complete them. For example, a robot that
can learn to sort recycled household materials.
 Assisted intelligence systems that review and reveal
patterns in historical data, such as unstructured socialmedia posts, and help people perform tasks more
quickly and better by using the information gleaned.
For example, techniques such as deep learning, natural
language processing and anomaly detection can uncover
leading indicators of hurricanes and other major weather
events.
 Augmented intelligence systems that use AI to help
people understand and predict an uncertain future.
For example, AI-enabled management simulators can
help examine scenarios involving climate policy and
greenhouse gas emissions, as pioneered by MITs John
Sterman.18
 Autonomous intelligence systems that automate
decision-making without human intervention. For
example, systems that can identify patterns of high
demand and high cost in home heating, adapting usage
automatically to save a homeowner money.
Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

7

Research on AI algorithms has been moving quickly,
especially since big data has been combined with statistical
machine-learning algorithms.
Narrow, task-driven AI techniques, already important in
many industrial applications, are now working with big
data to allow pattern recognition in unstructured text
and images. The potential of deep learning using neural
network architecture continues to grow  as computers
become faster and big data becomes ever more prevalent
 enhancing performance in fields such as language
translation and autonomous cars.
The latest advances in unsupervised deep reinforcement
learning, from DeepMinds AlphaGo Zero research, show
that in certain situations AI can be surprisingly powerful
even without input data or labels.19 In situations where the
boundary conditions are known, reinforcement learning
needs substantially less time and computer processing
power than older methods. This research also developed
an intelligence that was new to humans, accelerating the
natural selection cycles of intelligence, but in machines.
To date, reinforcement learning has been primarily used
for AI gaming agents, but should also help in corporate
strategic analysis, process optimization and many other
domains where the rules and different states of play are well
known. However, this is often not true for many systems
encountered in the real world and a central research priority
is to identify the real-world systems where reinforcement
learning would be most useful.
Experts expect that supervised and unsupervised learning
techniques will become increasingly blended and that such
hybrid techniques will open the way for human-machine
collaborative learning and for AI to develop more advanced,
human-like, capabilities.

Progress in AI may accelerate as new techniques are
developed to overcome existing challenges with machine
learning (deep learning in particular) and to solve problems
in the field. Two such techniques are synthetic data creation
and transfer learning (transferring the model learnt from a
task in a certain domain and applying it to a related problem
in that domain). Both of these enable AI to learn more
quickly, tackling a wider range of problems (particularly
those for which there is less historical data available).
In addition, the shift towards Explainable AI, which aims
to create a suite of machine learning techniques that
produce more explainable models whilst maintaining high
performance levels, will facilitate wider adoption of machine
learning techniques and potentially become best practice or
even inform regulatory requirements.
Ultimately, all this culminates in the quest for artificial general
intelligence (AGI), at which point, the AI begins to master
reasoning, abstraction, communication and the formulation
and understanding of knowledge. Here the critical need
for progress in AI safety becomes fully apparent. This
will involve the development of algorithms with safety
considerations at their core.
Future advances in AI will need advanced computing power
(currently it takes around 83,000 processors operating
for 40 minutes to run the equivalent of one second of
computations performed by just 1 percent of the human
brain),20 so advances in quantum computing, distributed
computing and deep-learning chips will be essential. In
addition, further understanding of advanced cognitive and
emotional tasks will help bring about new applications.

Figure 1: Timeline of AI developments
Source: PwC

Past is not prologue when it comes to artificial intelligence
Narrow AI
(rule-based, speech)

Narrow AI  with big data
(B-2-C, search, ecommerce)

Democratisation &
embodied AI

Collaborative AI on
new AI hardware

Artificial general
intelligence

Personalization:
76,897 Micro-genres

Deep learning  image processing

Data scientist in a box

Man-machine collaboration

Quantum computing

Rule-based decisions

Handwriting & voice recognition

Neuromorphic computing
Home & service robots
Emotional robots

Industrial robots

Past

8

90s

Self-driving vehicles

NLP & big data statistical learning

Brain-computer interfaces

00s

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

Now

Next 5 years

Next 20 years

Future

The AI opportunity for our environment
The most important consideration in the development of AI is, arguably, to ensure that it benefits humanity, which includes
being both human-friendly and Earth-friendly.
Figure 2 highlights priorities for six of the worlds most pressing environmental challenges and the priority action areas for
successfully addressing them:
Figure 2: Priority action areas for addressing Earth challenge areas
Source: PwC

Climate change

 Clean power
 Smart transport
options
 Sustainable
production and
consumption
 Sustainable
land-use
 Smart cities and
homes

Biodiversity and
conservation

 Habitat protection
and restoration
 Sustainable trade
 Pollution control
 Invasive species
and disease
control
 Realizing
natural capital

Healthy Oceans

 Fishing
sustainably
 Preventing
pollution
 Protecting
habitats
 Protecting
species
 Impacts from
climate change
(including
acidification)

Water security

 Water supply
 Catchment
control
 Water efficiency
 Adequate
sanitation
 Drought
planning

Clean air

 Filtering and
capture
 Monitoring and
prevention
 Early warning
 Clean fuels
 Real-time,
integrated,
adaptive urban
management

Weather and
disaster
resilience
 Prediction and
forecasting
 Early warning
systems
 Resilient
infrastructure
 Financial
instruments
 Resilience
planning

In meeting these challenges, there is wide scope for innovation and investment. AI in particular has immense potential to
help unlock solutions. Indeed, an accompanying Technical Annex: Overview of AI Applications for Solving Environmental
Challenges provides a summary of research into more than 80 existing AI use cases for the environment.
Figure 3 provides a glimpse of such AI applications by environmental challenge area. Currently, most of these focus on
automated and assisted intelligence to unlock value from large unstructured real-time datasets. Future applications will
likely involve more systems propelled by autonomous decision-making where AI acts independently, thus creating new
opportunities and risks. The challenge for innovators, investors and governments is to identify and scale these pioneering
innovations, and also to make sustainability considerations central to wider AI development and usage.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

9

Figure 3: AI applications by challenge area
Source: PwC

Climate change






Optimised energy system forecasting
Smart grids for electricity use
Predict solar flares for protecting power grids
Renewable energy plant assessments
Optimised decentralised & peer-to-peer
renewable energy systems
 Optimised virtual power plants






On-demand shared transport mobility
AI-enabled electric cars
Autonomous vehicles for efficient transport
Vehicle to infrastructure communication and
optimisation
 Optimised traffic flows
 Integrated cost-efficient transport systems
 Demand-response charging infrastructure
Climate
change

 Smart traffic light & parking systems for urban
mobility management
 Optimised sustainable building design
 Energy-efficient building management systems
 Auditory responsive lighting & heating
 Optimised urban-level energy generation
and use
 Analytics & automation for smart urban
planning







Early crop yield prediction
Precision agriculture & nutrition
Hyper-local weather forecasting for crop management
Early detection of crop issues
Automated & enhanced land-use change detection for
avoided deforestation
 Monitoring health & well-being in livestock farming

 Supply chain monitoring and transparency
 Active optimisation of industrial machinery &
manufacturing
 Digital twins for lifespan performance
optimisation
 Smarter fresh-food replenishment
 Smart recycling systems
 Integrated municipal & industrial waste
management

Biodiversity and conservation







Precision monitoring of ecosystems
Bird habitat and migration pattern prediction
Simulation of animal and habitat interaction
Habitat loss detection and monitoring
Micro drones for pollination
Optimised breeding of plants

 Detection of unauthorised animal capture
 Image-based detection of illegal wildlife trade
 Poacher route prediction and high risk animal
tracking
 Food value chain optimisation
 Supply-chain monitoring & origin tracking

Biodiversity
and
conservation

 Register & trading of biological & biomimetic
assets
 Plant species identification
 Machine-automated land-use detection linked
to ecosystem payments

 Pollutant dispersal prediction and tracking
 Analysis of urban runoff quality issues

 Machine-automated biodiversity analysis
 Smart mosquito traps
 Plant disease identification & detection

Healthy oceans






Overfishing prevention and control
Automated fish catch thresholds
Insights for fishermen
Aquaculture monitoring
Monitoring & detection of illegal fishing
activities
 Optimising patrol schedules

 Marine litter prediction
 Robotic fish to fight pollution
 Real-time monitoring of pollution levels

Healthy
oceans

 Real-time monitoring of ocean temperature
and pH
 Phytoplankton distribution detection and
prediction
 Monitoring of ocean currents
 Monitoring of coral reef ecosystems

*including acidification

10

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth






 Monitoring marine habitats for change
(e.g. marine dead zones)
 Habitat conservation assessments
 Coral reef mapping
 Autonomous vehicle deep sea assessments

Monitoring location and quantities of ocean species
Predicting the spread of invasive species
Monitoring & prevention of illegal trafficking of marine wildlife
Drones & AI to analyse whale health

Water security
 Water supply monitoring and management
 Water quality simulation & data alerts

 Asset maintenance on critical water and
wastewater expenditures

 Drought prediction
 Simulations for drought planning
 Drought impact assessments

 Harmful algal blooms detection and monitoring



Water
security

 Residential water use monitoring and
management
 Optimisation of industrial water use
 Predictive maintenance of water plants
 Early warning system for water infrastructure
 Detect underground leaks in potable water
supply systems
 Smart meters in homes

 Drones and AI for real-time monitoring of river quality
 Ensuring adequate sanitation of water reserves
 Real-time monitoring and management of household
water supply

Clean air
 Real-time air pollution monitoring &
simulations
 Air pollutant source detection

 Optimised sensor-based air purifying systems
 Carbon capture, sequestration and use

Clean Air
 Advanced battery and fuel-cell design
 Advanced battery components
 Pollution forecasting for transport management

 2-10 day pollution level forecasting
 Air quality alerts

Weather and disaster resilience
 Extreme weather event modelling and
prediction

 Climate informatics for enhanced climate
modelling






Impact & risk mitigation analytics
Emergency risk communication
Real-time disaster risk mapping
Real-time disaster response coordination

 Natural catastrophe early warning
 Social media enabled disaster response
 Real-time communication of natural disasters

Weather
and disaster
resilience



 Disaster-ready urban infrastructure and
buildings

 Rapid, multi-source risk analysis

 Analytics for claims analysis

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

11

AI game changers for the Earth
In addition to enhancing current efforts to address
environmental issues, there is enormous potential to create
AI-enabled game changers in which the application of AI,
often in combination with other Fourth Industrial Revolution
technologies, has the potential to deliver transformative
solutions.
The following set of potential game changers are defined by
five key features:
1. Transformational impact (i.e. it could completely disrupt
or alter current approaches)
2. Adoption potential (i.e. the potential population size is
significant)
3. Centrality of AI to the solution (i.e. AI is a key cog in the
solution)
4. Systems impact (i.e. the game changer could really shift
the dial across human systems)
5. Realizable enabling environment, including political and
social dynamics (i.e. the enabling environment can be
identified and supported)
Some such possible game changers are listed individually
below. But often, cross-sectoral combinations of these
game changes offer the greatest potential to fundamentally
transform human systems. Autonomous electric vehicles, for
example, could work in combination with distributed-energy
grids, so that the charging stations, and thus the vehicles,
are fed by a decentralized and optimized renewable-energy
grid and ultimately become sources in this grid themselves.

Emerging AI game changers
1. Autonomous and connected electric
vehicles
AI will be vital in the widespread transition
to autonomous connected electric vehicles
(EVs), which will ultimately transform shorthaul mobility while reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and delivering cleaner air. Machine-learning-enabled
autonomous electric vehicles will improve the efficiency of
transport networks as connected vehicles communicate
with one another and with transport infrastructure to identify
hazards while optimizing navigation and network efficiency.
EV charging will become more affordable via demandresponse software programs enabled by big data (such
as Auto Grid). Clean, smart, connected and increasingly
autonomous and shared short-haul transport will combine AI
with other Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies, notably
the Internet of Things, drones and advanced materials (in
battery breakthroughs, for example).
Increased demand for transport could offset some efficiency
gains, but overall a smart transport system enabled by AI
can be expected to lower emissions. Improved efficiency
may also encourage car sharing and reduce car ownership,
12

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

further reducing emissions from manufacturing and
operating vehicles.
Still, the transition to connected autonomous fleets in cities
will be gradual and will vary from country to country. It may
be decades before fully autonomous urban fleets are the
norm. In addition to developing the technology, challenges
related to public acceptance, legal and insurance liability
questions, and the provision of charging infrastructure will
need to be addressed. Furthermore, the vehicle replacement
cycle takes approximately 15 20 years.
While full Level 5 vehicle autonomy (with no human
intervention at all) may still be decades away, Level 4 AVs
(highly automated, but with driver takeover when needed)
may be tested on roads as early as 2021. At this level, cars
can drive in cities and provide mobility-on-demand services.
More substantial emission-reduction benefits also begin to
appear.
2. Distributed energy grids
In the energy grid, the application of
machine learning, including deep learning, is
increasingly widespread in industry. For the
environment, the use of AI to make distributed
energy possible at scale is critical for decarbonizing
the power grid, expanding the use of (and market for)
renewables and increasing energy efficiency. AI can enhance
the predictability of demand and supply for renewables,
improve energy storage and load management, assist in the
integration and reliability of renewables and enable dynamic
pricing and trading, creating market incentives. AI-capable
virtual power plants (VPPs) can integrate, aggregate, and
optimize the use of solar panels, microgrids, energy storage
installations and other facilities. Distributed energy grids may
also be extended to incorporate new sources such as solar
spray or paint-coated infrastructure of vehicles, and to allow
AI-enabled solar roads to expand, connect and optimize
the grid further. In solar roads, for example, AI could allow
a road to learn to heat up to melt snow, or to adjust traffic
lanes based on vehicle flow.
Smart grids will also use other Fourth Industrial Revolution
technologies, including the Internet of Things, blockchain
(for peer-to-peer energy trading) and advanced materials
(to increase the number of distributed sources and optimize
energy storage).
All of this will require sufficient regulation to assure the
security and integrity of the software, ownership and
control of intellectual property rights (which may help
unlock investment and innovation), management of, and
responsibility for, operational elements that are powered by
machine learning, and regulatory frameworks for transferring
and trading energy, often virtually. As economies and
settlements move away from heavy infrastructure towards

smart infrastructure with a low environmental footprint, the
decentralized nature of distributed energy grids mean they
have the potential to be used globally.
3. Smart agriculture
Precision agriculture (including precision
nutrition) is expected to increasingly involve
automated data collection and decisionmaking at the farm level  for example to
plant, spray and harvest crops optimally, to allow early
detection of crop diseases and issues, to provide timed
nutrition to livestock, and generally to optimize agricultural
inputs and returns. This promises to increase the resource
efficiency of the agriculture industry, lowering the use of
water, fertilizers and pesticides, which are creating runoff
that currently finds its way into rivers, oceans and insect
populations, causing damage to important ecosystems.
Here the key Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies that
will combine with AI include robot labour (such as Blue
River21 products and core intelligence chatbots), drones,
synthetic biology (in crop genome analysis, for example)
and advanced materials. Machine and deep learning
will also work in tandem with the Internet of Things and
with drones. Sensors measuring conditions such as crop
moisture, temperature and soil composition will give AI
the data needed to automatically optimize production and
trigger important actions such as adding moisture.22 Drones
are increasingly being used to monitor conditions and
communicate with the sensors and AI-enabled systems.23
Regulation of data ownership, pricing algorithms for
commodity goods and cross-border data flows will need to
keep pace with these fast-growing technological advances.
Smart agriculture has the potential to fundamentally
change agriculture even more than 20th century massfarming methods did. And these changes may spread more
rapidly than previous ones.
4. Weather forecasting and climate
modelling
A new field of Climate Informatics is already
blossoming, harnessing AI to fundamentally
transform weather forecasting (including
prediction of extreme events) and to improve understanding
of the effects of climate change.24 This is promising because
the weather and climate-science community already has
large amounts of data and continues to collect more,
providing a fine test bed for machine and deep learning
applications. Until now, use of these frequently updated
datasets has demanded substantial high-performance
computing power and limited the accessibility and usability
for the scientific and decision-making communities. AI can
solve these challenges, increasing both the performance
of weather and climate modelling, and making it more
accessible and usable for decision-making.

Public agencies including the UK Met Office and NASA, and
private-sector actors such as IBM and Microsoft, are using
AI and machine learning to enhance the performance and
efficiency of weather and climate models.25 These models
process complicated physical equations  including fluid
dynamics for the atmosphere and oceans  and heuristics
for elements that cant be fully resolved (for example,
aspects of atmospheric chemistry such as ice particles
turning to water). The complexity of the governing equations
requires expensive, energy-intensive computing, but deeplearning networks can emulate some aspects of these
climate simulations, allowing computers to run much faster
and incorporate more complexity of the real-world system
into the calculations. AI techniques may also help correct
biases in models, extracting the most relevant data to avoid
data degradation and otherwise improve computational
efficiency. In all of these cases, AI, with human oversight,
supervises to improve simulations. Over time, cheaper,
faster weather and climate models unlocked through AI
could reduce the need for energy-hungry supercomputers,
lower the cost of research and open the field of weather and
climate science to many more researchers.
Wider AI applications include simpler machine-learning
techniques, combining weather models and ancillary
impacts data, to help predict the effects of small-scale
extreme weather events (such as windstorms and floods)
on human systems, allowing better risk management.
More broadly, however, the application of nascent deep
reinforcement learning techniques is unchartered territory for
climate and weather science. Investigation will be needed to
identify the real-world physical systems in which these new
tools will be most useful.
We are already seeing how better weather and climate
data helps decision-makers from the public and private
sectors to improve climate resilience. The UK Met Office,
for example, has developed a chatbot application to
demonstrate how frictionless data or queries can be
extracted from complex big datasets, using sophisticated AI
in real time and communicating to the user through a simple
interface. Another example involves artificial assistants, fed
by forecasts data, that can help make everyday decisions,
from what to wear to when to travel.
Some companies are already working together, and with
universities and government agencies, within the field
of climate informatics. There is now an opportunity to
formalize, organize and promote the emerging scientific
discipline of AI for weather and climate science, including
international coordination (for example, through the World
Meteorological Organization and the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change), dedicated national R&D funding
and cross-industry collaboration.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

13

5. A community disaster-response data
and analytics platform
The speed and effectiveness with which
organizations and people can respond to
disasters has a substantial impact on the
extent of economic losses and human suffering, particularly
in the most catastrophic events. But delays often occur due
to a lack of information, analytical insight and awareness of
the best course of action. Often the necessary data exists
in large part, but is segregated among various organizations
and is thus mostly inaccessible to communities.
Better resiliency planning is also an important component
to mitigate the damage of future natural catastrophes. AI
can be used to sort through multidimensional data about a
region and identify which aspects have the biggest impact
on resilience. AI can run and analyse simulations of different
weather events and disasters in a region to seek out
vulnerabilities and identify the resiliency plans that are most
robust across a range of event types.
New hybrid systems of rules and tools can use data and AI
techniques to build a Community Distributed Data Escrow
system that could enhance disaster preparation and
response through coordination of emergency information
capabilities.26 When a disaster strikes, predefined uses
of data would be activated to equip first responders with
better tools for understanding the local context and take
precise action. For example, machine learning combined
with natural language processing algorithms could identify
the best station points and routes for distribution and
evacuation, the amount of relief required and optimal reliefeffort timetables. Here AI would work in combination with
other Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies including
drones and the Internet of Things. Deep reinforcement
learning may one day be integrated into disaster simulations
to determine optimal response strategies, similar to the way
AI is currently being used to identify the best move in games
like AlphaGo.
Harnessing AI to provide better disaster response and
planning will require public-private partnerships. A
community of technical, legal and accounting experts,
for example, would need to specify key datasets and
standardize approaches, define methodologies for
leveraging APIs and machine learning tools to access vital
data securely and accountably, and establish the terms and
conditions for stakeholders to operate within the system.
6. Decentralized water
Machine and deep learning could enable a
step-change in the optimization of waterresource management. Increasingly, AI
has the potential to create distributed offgrid water resources, analogous to decentralized energy
systems.
Household smart meters can produce large volumes
of data that can be used to predict water flows, spot
inconsistencies and check leaks. The next stage will be
to combine machine learning, the Internet of Things and
14

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

blockchain to create a truly decentralized water system,
where local resources and closed-loop water recycling gain
value. Water resources could even be traded via blockchain.
Furthermore, machine learning, predictive modelling and
robotics can be combined to transform current approaches
to building and managing water infrastructure and to
accelerate innovation in environmental engineering. Rivers,
for example, could be engineered to autonomously adjust
their own sediment flows. Coupled with AI-informed
pricing, such approaches could optimize water usage and
drive behaviour change by providing incentives for water
conservation.
7. AI-designed intelligent, connected and
liveable cities
Beyond autonomous vehicles, deep learning
also promises better urban planning, leading
to resilient, human-centric cities with minimal
air pollution and environmental impact. AI could also be
used to simulate and automate the generation of zoning
laws, building ordinances and floodplains. Combined
with AR and VR, AI-generated data could be used by city
planners and infrastructure investors, along with officials
responsible for ensuring disaster preparedness and, when
needed, reconstruction.
AI, smart meters and the Internet of Things can also help
forecast and optimize urban energy generation and demand
 both city-wide and at the level of individual homes and
buildings. Real-time AI-optimized energy efficiency can
have an immediate and substantial impact on energy
consumption (Google, for example, cut power use in its data
centres by 40% by using DeepMinds reinforcement learning
algorithms to optimize cooling.27) AI-enabled smart grids will
also be critical for fast-growing emerging cities, and are in
fact already being piloted, from Brazil to the Philippines.
Combining real-time city-wide data on energy and water
consumption and availability, traffic flows, people flows,
and weather could create an urban dashboard. With the
addition of AI this could optimize water and energy use
across the city, potentially reducing the need for costly
additional infrastructure while reducing pollution and
congestion  thereby reducing the citys environmental
footprint and increasing its liveability.
8. Oceans data platform
Real-time monitoring with AI can improve
decision-making in fields ranging from species
management and protection to natural
resource management to climate resilience.
One early example is the Ocean Data Alliance,28 which
has started to work together to develop and implement
open-source solutions to provide the data needed for
comprehensive monitoring of ocean resources, from
satellites to data from ocean exploration technologies.
Developed fully, this approach could allow decision-makers
to use machine learning to monitor, predict and respond
to changing conditions such as illegal fishing, a disease
outbreak or a coral-bleaching event.

New processing capabilities could provide close-to-real-time
transparency by enabling authorities, and even the general
public, to monitor fishing, shipping, ocean mining and other
activities. Vessel algorithmic patterns could identify illegal
fishing, biological sensors could monitor the health of coral
reefs and ocean current patterns could improve weather
forecasting.

Further-off AI game changers

One of the main challenges to realizing such a platform is
the processing power required: ocean modelling is second
only to astrophysics in its hunger for computing power. But
as the cost of data storage and processing declines, new
possibilities to model human activities and how they impact
our oceans will become available. To prevent the emergence
of multiple competing platforms, which could reduce
effectiveness and increase the overall costs of collecting,
managing, and using ocean data, an open-access platform
could be created that enables data from different sources
to continually be uploaded in a standardized format.
Public-private partnerships may be needed to ensure trust,
governance and accuracy.

A real-time, open API digital geospatial dashboard
for the planet would enable the monitoring, modelling
and management of environmental systems at a scale
and speed never before possible  from tackling illegal
deforestation, water extraction, fishing and poaching
to air pollution, natural disaster response and smart
agriculture. We have the AI methods to do this, but we
need more information, more frequently received and at
greater resolution than at present. The challenge is to build
something truly transformational, easy to use in real-time,
open-access and data-dense (meaning that the information
is high-resolution, scalable and aggregates environmental
and human exposure data). This will require collaboration
among entrepreneurs, industry, government and the nonprofit sector.

9. Earth bank of codes
Bio-inspired innovations (such as bloodpressure medication derived from viper
venom) aim to replicate natures products and
processes. Historically, the revenues from
such activities have not been shared with the indigenous
and traditional communities from which the knowledge
comes. For the first time in history, the fair sharing of
benefits and a significant new stream of conservation
finance is now possible using a combination of blockchain,
artificial intelligence, advanced sensors and the Internet of
Things.
The Amazon Third Way initiative29 is developing the Earth
Bank of Codes (EBC), a project to create an open, global
public-good digital platform that registers natures assets,
recording their spatial and temporal provenance and
codifying the associated rights and obligations. (This helps
to implement the Nagoya Protocol of the Convention on
Biological Diversity.) A fusion of AI and complex systems
analytics will be vital to bundling the biological, biomimetic
and traditional-knowledge assets from a biodiversity
hotspot to maximize economic and conservation value
simultaneously. In addition, an AI-driven biological search
engine will allow users to understand more fully the planets
web of life, which could optimize scientific discovery,
catalyse a myriad of bio-inspired innovations and improve
conservation outcomes by creating new sources of
economic value. AI techniques will include natural language
processing, deep learning, computer vision, probabilistic
programming and an array of statistical machine-learning
techniques.

By the 2030s, further advances in AI and other Fourth
Industrial Revolution technologies may bring us more
innovations for the environment. These could include:
1. A real-time digital dashboard of the Earth

Public and private systems that can help amass the
necessary data include the European Space Agencys
Copernicus,31 NASAs Earth Observing System and the
private companies Planet, Digital Globe and Orbital Insights.
These organizations can provide comprehensive Earth
observation from space. However, this data would need to
be aggregated and retrieved in context, which requires tools
to extract and label the relevant information. AI can help
tackle this challenge as we build a dashboard with usable
data, including both environmental- and hazard-data layers,
along with exposure layers. The implications for naturalresource management (including investment, policy-making
and dispute settlement) could be profound.
At least two steps are already being taken in this direction.
The US National Science Foundations EarthCube initiative
uses machine learning and simulation modelling to create a
3D living model of the entire planet. And the US company
Planet has put over 180 micro-satellites into orbit, to image
the whole planets landmass daily, at a resolution of 35
metres.32 Platforms like this one could bring a breakthrough:
Planet plans to incorporate computer vision developments
and machine learning to make an index of the planet,
tracked over time. Crucially, it is developing practical
ways to extract data and is collaborating with NGOs and
governments to develop public-good analytics for Earthsystems management.

This project is building a coalition of willing stakeholders to
co-design and co-implement the EBC in the Amazon Basin
(called the Amazon Bank of Codes30) before replicating and
scaling in other biomes on land and in the oceans.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

15

2. Autonomous farming and end-to-end optimized food
system
AI could enable farms to become almost fully autonomous.
Farmers may be able to grow different crops symbiotically,
using AI to spot or predict problems and to take appropriate
corrective actions via robotics. For example, should a corn
crop be seen to need a booster dose of nitrogen, an AIenabled system could deliver the nutrients. AI-augmented
farms could also automatically adjust crop quantities, based
on supply and demand data. This kind of production could
be more resilient to earth cycles.
Our understanding of human dietary needs is likely to
improve in the coming decades, as we learn how individuals
process their food intake, based on data from many
individual bodies. Applying machine learning to this data
could generate personalized nutrition plans optimized for
individuals. When combined with autonomous farming,
autonomous delivery vehicles, in-house robotic chefs and
in-house vertical farming, entire food supply chains could be
optimized and transformed, creating minimum-waste supply
chains while providing high yields. The same principles
could also be applied to livestock.
3. Reinforcement learning for natural sciences
breakthroughs
Deep reinforcement learning could evolve to enable its
application to real-world problems, including solving
problems addressed by Earth scientists. This could enable
scientific progress and discovery in scientific areas where
the boundary conditions of a system are known but input

16

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

data is lacking, and/or the complexity of a system is such
that it requires access to currently infeasible computing
architecture.
Technically, step one is to understand what the optimal real
world natural and human-natural systems are, in which we
can most fully define the boundary conditions, to enable the
application of reinforcement learning. A hybrid approach that
combines supervised and unsupervised learning will likely
be most successful, given the challenges of fully defining the
boundary conditions of real world problems. Understanding
which real world systems can be codified and optimizing for
reinforcement learning will require collaboration between AI
pioneers and domain experts including climate scientists,
materials scientists, biologists, and engineers. For example,
DeepMind co-founder, Demis Hassabis, has suggested that,
in the materials science space, a descendant of AlphaGo
Zero could be used to search for a room temperature
superconductor  a hypothetical substance that allows
electrical current to flow with zero lost energy, further
allowing for incredibly efficient power systems. As was done
with Go, the algorithm would start by combining different
inputs (in this case, the atomic composition of various
materials and their associated qualities) until it discovers
something the humans had missed.
4. Quantum and distributed computing to dramatically
scale computational power for AI for the Earth
Instead of using brute force to increase the computing
power of AI, innovators are increasingly exploring other
advances such as deep learning chips, harnessing the
move to cloud, and the ability to use distributed computing
and quantum computing. All of these advances that

increase computing processing power will enable large
scale optimization of big data analytics and AI, scaling and
transforming their application and impact for environmental
challenges. But advances in quantum computing, in parallel,
could offer fundamentally new opportunities for scientific
discovery. Classical computers cannot compute things the
way nature does (which operates in quantum mechanics);
they are limited to the human made binary code (of zeros
and ones) rather than the natural reality of continuous
variables. In other words, with classical computers we are
currently modelling the Earth system in a way that it does
not actually function. Quantum computers open the door to
solving the quantum problems as they exist in nature and
discovering ways in which the Earth system really works:
from key applications in quantum chemistry, to quantum
physics and mechanics. This could lead to the discovery
of new advanced materials, new biological processes
(e.g. energy transference, cellular growth, or ecosystem
dynamics), and progress in the modelling of planetary
physics.
5. The home supercomputer and AI research assistants
for democratized scientific progress
Earth science is currently one of the most computational
heavy fields of scientific discovery  with supercomputing

systems currently in widespread use across the field and
climate researches using some of the largest and most
powerful systems available today. The cost of building,
accessing and running supercomputers inhibits access to
researchers and limits the pace at which new modelling and
research can be undertaken. Over the coming decade or
two, computational power and advances in AI algorithms
will likely reach a point in which the average home computer
will have as much power as todays supercomputers.
In parallel, machine learning more broadly will also unlock
faster and cheaper earth system and climate models, and
AI will begin to replace many of the labour-intensive and
time-consuming tasks that scientists now do (e.g., trawling
through data archives, converting files)  acting in effect
as an AI research assistant. The result is that the pool of
scientists and practitioners that have access to computing
power and AI tools could increase vastly, progress in Earth
science and its application could become democratized,
and scientific productivity could be substantially boosted
with a subsequent acceleration in discoveries. Again these
could include breakthroughs in understanding of weather
risk, future regional and local climate impacts, and more
challenging areas including climate feedback loops and
tipping points.

Figure 4: AI for the Earth game changers: Indicative timeline

AI

in

w
ea
th
Tr
er
i
& al d
&
tra e
cl
im
di cen
at
ng
t
r
e
O
a
fo
ce
liz
re
ed
an
ca
en
da
st
er
ta
s
gy
pl
,w
at
fo
at
Co
rm
er
m
gr
m
id
s
Ea uni
t
y
rth
di
Ba
s
nk aste
O
r
nof
de
Co res
p
m
d
an
es ons
d
e
Hy
EV
pl
at
cl bri
-A
fo
im d
V
s
rm
r
at
e
i
n
e/ inf
m
De we or
aj
ce ath cem
or
nt
er
ci
e
ra
nt
tie
s
ci
liz
s
l
e
e
ed
nc arn
w
e
i
n
at
g
er
fo
sy
r
De
st
em
su ep
pe re
s
r c in
on for
du ce
ct me
or n
di t le
sc ar
ov ni
er ng
Q
ie fo
u
s
m an
rn
at tu
ew
er m
ia
ls co
sc mp
ie u
nc te
e rs
br po
ea w
kt er
hr E
ou ar
Fu
gh th
tra lly
s &
ns au
t
po o
rt ma
sy te
st d
em &
s con
in n
m ec
aj te
or d
ci urb
tie a
s n

Source: PwC

tc
ar
sm
d

sy

Au

to

no

m

ne
es
ig
-d
AI

2040

En
ou
ds
fa
st to-e
rm
em n
in
d
W
g
o
i
pt
en des
im
er
p
iz
gy rea
ed
gr d d
fo
id
od
e
Re s & cen
tra tra
da al-t
di liz
sh im
bo e & ng ed
ar
Ho
d pu
m
fo bl
e
r t ic
su
he di
pe
Ea gita
rc
rth l
om
pu
te
rs
am
pl
ify
R&
D

iti

re
tu
ric
ul
ag
ar
t
Sm

2030

es

2020

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

17

AI unguided: Unintended consequences for the Earth
For all the enormous potential AI offers for building a sustainable planet for future generations, it also poses short- and longterm risks. These can be divided, broadly speaking, into six categories with varying impacts on individuals, organizations,
society, and the earth.
Figure 5: Artificial Intelligence risks
Source: PwC

Performance risks

 Risk of errors
 Risk of bias
 Risk of opaqueness
or black box risk
 Risk of
explainability
 Risk of stability of
performance

Security risks

 Cyber
intrusion risks
 Privacy risks
 Open-source
software risks

Control risks

 Risk of AI going
rogue
 Inability to
control
malevolent AI

Performance risks
For the most part, the outputs of AI systems are determined
within a black box and with little transparency, these
outputs may not be trusted. By their nature, AI algorithms
(which are self-learning and continuously adapting) are
difficult to explain and in many cases may not be explainable
to humans at all. An inability to understand the rationale
behind AI outputs also makes it difficult to ascertain whether
the performance or outputs of AI algorithms are accurate
or desirable. Significant risks are therefore conceivable.
The emerging field of explainable AI (XAI) research aims
to create new AI methods that are accountable to human
reasoning. But this field is still in its early days. Meanwhile,
ongoing research aims to reduce model bias resulting from
biases in training data, and to increase the stability of model
performance. As AI solutions are deployed, one unintended
consequence is the over-reliance on AI algorithms with
variable performance. It is essential that humans stay in
the loop on auditing algorithm outputs to mitigate these
unintended biases and wider performance risks.

18

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

Ethical risks

 Lack of
values risk
 Value
alignment risk
 Goal
alignment risk

Economic risks

 Job-displacement
risks
 Winner-takes-all
concentration of
power risk
 Liability risk
 Reputation risk

Societal risks

 Risk of
autonomous
weapons
proliferation
 Risk of
intelligence
divide

Example: Early-warning systems for natural disasters
such as flooding are trained using historical data
on weather patterns. However, if there is a lack of
understanding of factors driving model predictions
due to poor explainability, there is a significant risk
of false alarms or false negatives, particularly in
situations that are not represented in the data used to
train the AI model.33
Security risks
Misuse of AI via hacking is a serious risk, as many
algorithms being developed with good intentions (for
example, for autonomous vehicles) could be repurposed for
harm (for example, for autonomous weaponry). This raises
new risks for global safety. Good governance is required
to build explainability, transparency and validity into the
algorithms, including drawing lines between beneficial and
harmful AI. Machine-learning (especially deep-learning)
models can also be duped by malicious inputs known as
adversarial attacks. For example, it is possible to find input
data combinations that can trigger perverse outputs from
machine-learning models, in effect hacking them.

Example: Hackers could access automated warning
systems, distributed energy grids or connected
autonomous transport platforms, and cause regional
disruptions. Appropriate governance will be required
to ensure human and earth-friendly AI and prevent
misuse. Misuse of AI could also occur when systems
fall into the wrong hands. For example, poachers
could profit from AI-enabled endangered-animal
tracking tools meant for conservation efforts.
Control risks
AI systems work autonomously and interact with one
another, creating machine-centred feedback mechanisms
that can cause unexpected outcomes. For example,
chatbots interacting with one another have created their
own language that humans cannot understand. In 2010 a
financial crash was caused by the interactions of multiple AI
bots speed-trading, which created artificial market inflation.
Proactive control, monitoring and safeguards are necessary
to catch these issues before they become a problem.
Example: Smart-energy optimization across buildings
and infrastructure will create interactions between
energy-use decisions within each building and at
the regional level. Each building would operate
individually, assessing overall demand patterns
to determine low-cost energy-use approaches.
Depending on circumstances, individual building
decisions will interact with regional ones, potentially
altering demand in ways that could crash regional
energy systems.
Economic risks
As companies adopt AI, it may alter the competitive
landscape, creating winners and losers. Those able to
improve their decision-making most quickly through AI
may find the benefits accelerate very quickly, while slower
adopters may be left behind. Companies that struggle
in the AI transition may be forced to reduce investment,
possibly impairing their sustainability performance. Tax-base
erosion presents another economic threat as the current
system, based on bricks-and-mortar and nation-states,
struggles to keep pace with the globalized digital economy.
Tax erosion could be a drag on public spending, including
investment in, for example, programmes designed to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. Current tax systems may need
re-evaluation as automation changes workplaces, potentially
reducing the number of jobs available.

Social risks
Large-scale automation threatens to reduce employment in
transportation, manufacturing, agriculture and the service
sector, among others. Higher unemployment rates could
lead to greater inequality in society. In addition, algorithms
designed by a subset of the population at a national
and global level have the potential for unconscious bias,
possibly leading to results that marginalize minorities or
other groups. Autonomous weapons also pose a significant
threat to society, possibly permitting bigger, faster conflicts.
Once unleashed, this might lead to rapid and significant
environmental damage, even to a doomsday scenario
where weaponized AI presents an existential risk to
humanity.34
Example: Autonomous trucks and cars, along with
energy-efficient Internet of Things manufacturing,
offer considerable environmental benefits but could
also lead to a considerable loss of employment.
(Goldman Sachs estimates that the US alone will
lose an estimated 300,000 jobs per year when AV
saturation peaks).35 Regional economic decline and
widening social inequality and unrest could also
follow in manufacturing towns or along truck routes.
Ethical risks
The ethical and responsible use of AI involves three main
elements: the use of big data; the growing reliance on
algorithms to perform tasks, shape choices and make
decisions; and the gradual reduction of human involvement
in many processes. Together, these raise issues related
to fairness, responsibility, equality and respect for human
rights.36 Additionally, while biased AI outcomes can raise
significant privacy concerns, many insights and decisions
about individuals are based on inferred group or community
attributes. Accordingly, consideration of the harm AI
could do must be framed beyond the individual level and
recognize that privacy is not the only issue.
Example: Autonomous emergency food- and
disaster-relief delivery systems that are trained using
reinforcement learning or historical demand patterns
will route supplies to specific regions during natural
disasters. This could create ethical dilemmas relating
to accountability for delivery dysfunctions, prioritysetting and results.

Example: Increased productivity from automation,
plus rising consumption from improved
personalization, product design and AI-informed
marketing, could increase resource use, waste and
demand for energy.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

19

Conclusions and recommendations
Conclusions
AI systems, and their ability to control machines
automatically and remotely, have caught the publics
imagination. The opportunity for AI to be harnessed to
benefit humankind and its environment is substantial.
The intelligence and productivity gains that AI will deliver
can unlock new solutions to societys most pressing
environmental challenges: climate change, biodiversity,
ocean health, water management, air pollution, and
resilience, among others.
However, AI technology also has the potential to amplify
and exacerbate many of the risks we face today. To be
sure that AI is developed and governed wisely, government
and industry leaders must ensure the safety, explainability,
transparency and validity of AI applications. It is incumbent
on authorities, AI researchers, technology pioneers and AI
adopters in industry alike to encourage deployments that
earn trust and avoid abuse of the social contract.
Achieving this requires a collaborative effort to ensure that
as AI progresses, its idea of a good future is aligned to
human values and encapsulates a future that is safe for
humanity in all respects  its people and their planet.

 Collaborating for interdisciplinary solutions: There
will be a need for significantly more interaction among
technologists, policy-makers, domain specialists
and even philosophers to optimize the design and
deployment of AI applications for the Earth, both at
a broad systems level and in relation to individual
applications. In conjunction, academic and research
institutions will need to develop interdisciplinary
educational and research programmes to reflect this
multifaceted and multidisciplinary approach.
 Directing finance for innovation: Realizing the goal
of Earth-friendly AI will require significant funding
to support scaling and commercialization of new
solutions. This includes large-scale basic and applied
R&D investment that bridges the technology and
environmental disciplines, impact capital directed at
technology solutions, specialized venture and growth
capital, and government financial instruments that
catalyse private sector innovation, for example through
innovation accelerators, price support mechanisms and
targeted patient capital.
Priority actions for each stakeholder group include the
following:

Recommendations

For companies

Leveraging AI technologies, not only for business and shortterm growth prospects, but also for sustainable and resilient
growth, requires decisive action. Public-private dialogue
and partnerships will be crucial to develop solutions, assure
good governance and overcome financial barriers.

 Companies from all sectors: Firms should establish
board-level AI advisory units to ensure that companies
boards understand AI, including safety, ethics, values
and governance considerations. Companies should
also ensure that their technology strategies build in
and optimize the effect AI will have on sustainability
outcomes, both to capture new business opportunities
and to manage risks.

This section lists some recommendations, categorized
by stakeholder groups, to speed up innovation, minimize
environmental risks and maximize environmental benefits
from the application of AI. Three overarching areas, however,
are particularly pertinent to all stakeholders:
 Delivering responsible AI: To ensure that
sustainability principles are embedded alongside
wider considerations of AI safety, ethics, value and
governance. This applies to decisions by private and
public sector actors about investment in, design of, and
operation of AI systems. It also incorporates efforts to
advance and implement AI accountability, along with the
development of governance frameworks, particularly in
relation to data and algorithms. Definitions and standards
relating to the misuse of AI will also be needed that
incorporate misuse for environmental as well as human
harm. The Partnership on AI is a positive step in this
direction.37

20

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

 Technology pioneer companies: Both start-ups
and established technology firms developing AI
need to embed environmental considerations into
design principles. Technology pioneers also have an
opportunity to innovate in realizing the potential of AI
for the environment. Microsofts new AI for Earth
programme,38 an example of co-innovation, includes
grants to entrepreneurs tackling Earth challenges to help
them access AI technology; AI training for universities
and non-governmental organizations working on climate,
water, agriculture and biodiversity; and partnerships and
investments to commercialize promising new solutions.39
 Leadership on responsible AI: Responsible
companies, in alliance with governments, could assume
a leadership role in embedding sustainability principles
alongside wider AI safety, ethics, values and governance
considerations.

 AI accountability: Data access will be essential
to building many of the AI applications that deliver
environmental benefit. However, robust and wellgoverned data security, use, consent and processing
are critical to building societal trust and confidence. Data
(and in some circumstances algorithms) will in many
cases have to be auditable, particularly in collaborations
with public-sector institutions. Industry cooperation will
also be important to advance AI accountability.
 Industry collaboration on AI standard-setting:
To develop industry-wide and industry-regulator
teamwork to aid in AI standard-setting (for example,
through consensus protocols and smart contracts that
include efficiency principles, or which require common
agreement and governance).
 Interdisciplinary solutions: Many emerging AI solutions
could have enormous impacts on the ways we live and
work, but industry-led solutions may be designed and
developed by a small group of people with a limited
perspective. Increasingly, there will need to be diversity
in AI development and use, including significantly more
interaction among technology practitioners, domain
and sectoral experts and philosophers, lawyers,
psychologists and others, in order to develop, deploy
and champion holistic AI mechanisms and solutions.
For governments
Given the potential for disruptive social and environmental
consequences, it will be essential to develop sophisticated
national and international governance structures for the new
AI-enabled digital economy. These governance mechanisms
 collaborating with industry and civil society  can help
ensure that AI advances support inclusive growth that is
aligned with the UNs Sustainable Development Goals.
Within these frameworks, the following policy considerations
should be advanced:
 R&D investment: Coordinated and targeted largescale funding commitments could encourage research
and funding collaboration on AI for good, connecting
industrial, academic and government research
agencies. Research priorities will need to encourage
interdisciplinary research  bridging technology, social,
and environmental disciplines will be essential. This
could include funding new specialist programmes and
international research collaborations  for example,
on the application of AI to weather prediction and
climate modelling under the governance of the World
Meteorological Organization and national meteorological
and climate agencies.
 Responsible technology policy: The development
of responsible technology policies could set clear
parameters for technology innovators and ensure
alignment with human values and international
frameworks such as the Sustainable Development Goals.
Stakeholders could develop a definition and standard
regarding the misuse of AI, while ensuring that social
and environmental considerations are incorporated into
national digital strategies.

 Better data, trusted data: Creation of better data
environments, including for data access and data
skills, could maximize the use of machine learning for
sustainable solutions. Efforts could focus on improving
the systems and protocols by which data is defined,
gathered, accessed and manipulated. This includes
government initiatives for open public data, industrygovernment collaboration on data and code verification
or audits and policy frameworks (or agreements) to make
strategic data available to specific users  with specified
safeguards  in order to enable AI applications for
societal and environmental benefits.
 Algorithm assurance and transparency: Governments
have a role in regulating the use of black box AI
models for high-risk, high-impact environmental domains
such as autonomous vehicles. Regulations could be
accompanied by a process for evaluating the robustness
of algorithms (algorithmic assurance) on an ongoing
basis.
 Algorithmic bias: Policy frameworks will need to
support technology companies, other industries
and researchers to manage potential systemic bias
in algorithms and ensure a social safety net for AI.
Crowd-sourced raw data that technology companies
use in their algorithms typically reflect the biases and
prejudices inherent in society at large. Policy frameworks
are needed to balance concerns about unfairness and
discrimination in publicly sourced big data with the
technical and ethical challenges of monitoring and the
potential censorship of data.
 Innovative finance mechanisms and partnerships:
There is a need to align both incentives and risks for
private-sector innovation and scaling of AI applications
for the environment, including support for early-stage
commercialization. This could include governmentbacked innovation incubators, accelerators, funds
and prizes; price-support mechanisms; and targeted
patient and/or concessional capital to enable scaling
of technological solutions for the public (including
environmental) good.
For investors
 Sustainable portfolios: Angel investors, venture
capitalists, accelerators and impact investors
should build and support a portfolio of Fourth
Industrial Revolution technology companies that
address sustainability challenges within their
remits. This approach could enable the impact
investment community to complement traditional
development projects with efforts that could speed
up the transformational impact  and the commercial
opportunity  of investments in technologies of the
Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

21

 Investment criteria: Mainstream institutional investors
and asset managers should embed sustainability
considerations into investment portfolios on AI (and other
Fourth Industrial Revolution) technologies.
For research institutions
 Bias & XAI research: Further research is needed to
identify algorithmic bias and to find ways to improve
the explainability of AI, specifically for environmental
applications that support government and company
efforts to harness AI for the Earth. As each domain has
nuances of how data or algorithmic bias influence the
system, there needs to be further evaluation of the risks
associated with environmental impact.
 Interdisciplinary programmes: Research institutions
should help lead the interdisciplinary approach by further
developing and disseminating educational programmes
that bring together environmental and technology/data
scientists and practitioners, while highlighting the use,
impact and risks of AI for the environment.
 Educational partnerships: To ensure vocationalschool and university graduates are ready to enter the
job market with practical tools that integrate digital
and sustainability. Partnerships between academia,
governments and the private sector could support the
integration of environmental, societal and governance
themes into AI and data and computer science degrees,
and vice versa.

22

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

Acknowledgements
The world Economic Forum would like to acknowledge
the valuable contributions of the following people in the
development of this document:
Lead authors
Celine Herweijer (PwC UK), Benjamin Combes (PwC UK),
Pia Ramchandani (PwC US), Jasnam Sidhu (PwC UK).
Other contributors
Anand Rao (PwC), Nishan Degnarain (Central Bank
of Mauritius), Juan Carlos Castilla Rubio (Space Time
Ventures), Alberto Arribas (Met Office), Pierre-Philippe
Mathieu (European Space Agency), Lucas Joppa
(Microsoft), Lloyd Treinish (IBM), Erica Lee (DeepFarm),
Katherine Hsiao (Palantir), David Hunt (Cainthus), David
Hunter (Optimal Labs), Will Marshall (Planet Labs), Chadwick
Manning (ElectrIQ Power), Andrew Scheuermann (Arch
Systems), Kaila Colbin (SingularityU Australia Summit),
Michael Gardner (Aqaix), Rob McCargow (PwC UK), Andy
Townsend (PwC UK), Lizzy Fitzgerald (PwC UK), Mary
Davies (PwC UK), Giulia Volla (PwC UK), William Hoffman
(World Economic Forum), Kay Firth-Butterfield (World
Economic Forum), Jahda Swanborough (World Economic
Forum).
Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth Initiative:
Advisory Group
Celine Herweijer (PwC UK), Dominic Waughray (World
Economic Forum), Steve Howard (We Mean Business
Coalition), Jim Leape (Stanford University), Usha Rao-Monari
(Global Water Development Partners).
Project Team
Benjamin Combes (PwC UK), Gaia Felber (World Economic
Forum), Sarah Franklin (PwC US), Jerica Lee (World
Economic Forum), Victoria Lee (World Economic Forum),
Jahda Swanborough (World Economic Forum).
Contact
For questions about the Fourth Industrial Revolution for the
Earth series of publications, contact:
Jahda Swanborough, Lead, Environmental Initiatives, World
Economic Forum: Jahda.swanborough@weforum.org
(series lead)
For questions about the Fourth Industrial Revolution for the
Earth Initiative, contact:
Gaia Felber, Project Specialist, Environmental Initiatives,
World Economic Forum: gaia.felber@weforum.org (Geneva)
Victoria Lee, Project Lead, Environmental Initiatives  4IR for
the Earth, World Economic Forum: Victoria.lee@weforum.
org (San Francisco)

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

23

Annex 1:
Glossary of AI terms
AI glossary
AI consists of a number of areas, including but not limited to those below:
Main AI areas

Description

Large-scale machine learning

Design of learning algorithms, as well as scaling existing algorithms, to work with
extremely large datasets.

Deep learning

Model composed of inputs such as image or audio and several hidden layers of
sub-models that serve as input for the next layer and ultimately have an output or
activation function.

Reinforcement learning

An area of machine learning that teaches computers to identify optimal behaviour
in different environments through a cumulative reward function.

Natural language processing (NLP)

Algorithms that process human language input and convert it into understandable
representations.

Collaborative systems

Models and algorithms to help develop autonomous systems that can work
collaboratively with other systems and with humans.

Computer vision (image analytics)

The process of pulling relevant information from an image or sets of images for
advanced classification and analysis.

Algorithmic game theory and
computational social choice

Systems that address the economic and social computing dimensions of AI,
such as how systems can handle potentially misaligned incentives, including
self-interested human participants or firms and the automated AI-based agents
representing them.

Soft robotics (robotic process
automation)

Automation of repetitive tasks and common processes such as IT, customer
servicing and sales without the need to transform existing IT system maps.

24

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

Annex 2:
The Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth initiative
The Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth initiative is
designed to raise awareness and accelerate progress
across this agenda for the benefit of society. In the first
phase of the project, specific environmental focus areas will
be considered in depth, exploring in detail how to harness
Fourth Industrial Revolution innovations to better manage
the worlds most pressing environmental challenges. Initial
focus areas will include:








Air pollution
Biodiversity
Cities
Climate change and greenhouse gas monitoring
Food systems
Oceans
Water resources and sanitation.

Working from these thematic areas, the World Economic
Forum, supported by Stanford University and PwC (as
project adviser) and advised by the members of the Global
Future Councils on the Future of Environment and Natural
Resource Security and specific Fourth Industrial Revolution
technology clusters, will seek to leverage their various
networks and platforms to:

 Develop a set of insight papers, taking a deep dive
into the possibilities of the Fourth Industrial Revolution
and each of these issues.
 Build new networks of practitioners and support them
to co-design and innovate for action on the environment
in each of these issue areas, leveraging the latest
technologies and research that the Fourth Industrial
Revolution offers
 Design a public-private accelerator for action,
enabling both government, foundational, research
organization, and commercial funds to be pooled
and deployed into scaling innovative Fourth Industrial
Revolution solutions for the environment.
 Help government stakeholders to develop and trial the
requisite policy protocols that will help Fourth Industrial
Revolution solutions for the environment to take hold and
develop.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth initiative will be
driven jointly out of the World Economic Forum Center for
the Fourth Industrial Revolution in San Francisco and other
Forum offices in New York, Geneva and Beijing.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

25

Endnotes
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

26

Stockholm University, Stockholm Resilience Centre [media release], Planetary Boundaries  an Update, January 2015,
available at: http://www.stockholmresilience.org/research/research-news/2015-01-15-planetary-boundaries---anupdate.html.
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, available at: http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainabledevelopment-goals/. The goals include: 1. End poverty; 2. End hunger; 3. Ensure health and well-being; 4. Quality
education; 5. Gender equality; 6. Clean water and sanitation; 7. Affordable and clean energy; 8. Decent work and
economic growth; 9. Resilient infrastructure, industry and innovation; 10. Reduce inequalities; 11. Sustainable cities
and communities; 12. Responsible consumption and production; 13. Climate action; 14. Life below water; 15. Life on
land; 16. Peace, justice and strong institutions; and 17. Revitalize global partnerships for the goals.
World Meteorological Organization, Greenhouse Gas Concentrations Surge to New Record, October 2017, available
at: https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/greenhouse-gas-concentrations-surge-new-record.
United Nations Environment Programme, The Emissions Gap Report 2017, November 2017, available at: https://
wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/22070/EGR_2017.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
McKie, R., Biologists think 50% of species will be facing extinction by the end of the century, The Guardian,
February 2017, available at: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/feb/25/half-all-species-extinct-endcentury-vatican-conference
(i) Cebellos, G, et al., Accelerated Modern Human-Induced Species Losses: Entering the Sixth Mass Extinction,
Science Advances, June 2015. http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/5/e1400253.
(ii) Mckie, R., Biologists Think 50% of Species Will be Facing Extinction by the End of the Century, February 2017,
available at: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/feb/25/half-all-species-extinct-end-century-vaticanconference.
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Stockholm Resilience Centre and Stockholm University, Global
Commons in the Anthropocene: World Development on a Stable and Resilient Planet, October 2016, available at:
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/global_commons_in_the_anthropocene_iiasa_wp-16-019.pdf (draft paper).
Arc Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, James Cook University [media release], Scientists Assess Bleaching
Damage on Great Barrier Reef, October 2016, available at: https://www.coralcoe.org.au/media-releases/scientistsassess-bleaching-damage-on-great-barrier-reef.
United Nations: World Water Assessment Programme, World Water Development Report 2015, March 2015, available
at: http://www.unwater.org/publication_categories/world-water-development-report/.
World Health Organization, Ambient (Outdoor) Air Quality and Health, September 2016, available at: http://www.
who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/.
World Health Organization, 7 Million Premature Deaths Annually Linked to Air Pollution, 25 March 2014, available at:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-pollution/en/.
Data taken from MunichREs NatCatService, viewed December 2017, available at: http://natcatservice.munichre.com/.
Schwab, Klaus, The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means, How to Respond, World Economic Forum, 2016.
PwC, Tech Breakthroughs Megatrend, How to Prepare for the Technological Breakthroughs Megatrend, and the
Eight Technologies to Start With, available at: https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/technology/tech-breakthroughsmegatrend.html.
PwC, 2017, Innovation for the Earth: Harnessing Technological Breakthroughs for People and the Planet, January
2017, available at: https://www.pwc.co.uk/sustainability-climate-change/assets/innovation-for-the-earth.pdf.
PwC, 2017 Global Digital IQ Survey, available at: https://www.pwc.com/us/en/advisory-services/digital-iq/assets/
pwc-digital-iq-report.pdf.
Tractica [media release], Artificial Intelligence Implementations Have Expanded to Encompass 215 Discrete Use
Cases Across Virtually All Industries, 28 August 2017, available at: https://www.tractica.com/newsroom/pressreleases/artificial-intelligence-implementations-have-expanded-to-encompass-215-discrete-use-cases-acrossvirtually-all-industries/.
Information about John Stermans climate simulation project at Climate Interactive website, available at https://www.
climateinteractive.org/.
Silver, David, et al., Mastering the Game of Go without Human Knowledge, Nature 550, 354359 (19 October 2017),
available at: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature24270. Also see DeepMind blog post, AlphaGo Zero: Learning
from Scratch, available at: https://deepmind.com/blog/alphago-zero-learning-scratch/.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

20. Feinberg, A., An 83,000-processor supercomputer can only match 1% of your brain, Gizmodo, June 2013, available
at: https://gizmodo.com/an-83-000-processor-supercomputer-only-matched-one-perc-1045026757
21. Blue River, viewed December 2017, available at: http://www.bluerivertechnology.com/.
22. Walker, J., AI for Weather Forecasting  In Retail, Agriculture, Disaster Prediction, and More, Techemergence,
October 2017, available at: https://www.techemergence.com/ai-for-weather-forecasting.
23. Anderson, C., Agricultural Drones: Relatively Cheap Drones with Advanced Sensors and Imaging Capabilities Are
Giving Farmers New Ways to Increase Yields and Reduce Crop Damage, MIT Technology Review, available at:
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/526491/agricultural-drones/.
24. Monteleoni, C., Schmidt, G.A., Alexander, F., Niculescu-Mizil, A., Steinhaeuser, K., Tippett, M., Banerjee, A.,
Blumenthal, M.B., Ganguly, A.R., Smerdon, J.E., Tedesco, M., Climate Informatics, Computational Intelligent Data
Analysis for Sustainable Development; Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Series, 2013, available at: http://faculty.
cs.gwu.edu/~cmontel/ciBookChapter.pdf.
25. Jones, N., How Machine Learning Could Help to Improve Climate Forecasts, Nature, available at: http://www.nature.
com/news/how-machine-learning-could-help-to-improve-climate-forecasts-1.22503.
26. A new initiative, the Data 4 Natural Disaster Preparedness Alliance, is exploring opportunities for new types of
agreements that lower shared risks and are open, distributed, adaptive, inclusive and designed to help realize this
game changer.
27. Deepmind Blog, DeepMind AI Reduces Google Data Centre Cooling Bill by 40%, July 2016, available at: https://
deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-ai-reduces-google-data-centre-cooling-bill-40/
28. World Economic Forum [press release], Pledge to Stop Illegal Tuna Fishing and Related Forced Labour on the High
Seas by 2020, June 2017, available at: https://www.weforum.org/press/2017/06/pledge-to-stop-illegal-tuna-fishingand-related-forced-labour-on-the-high-seas-by-2020/.
29. Amazon Third Way initiative, viewed December, 2017.
30. World Economic Forum, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SU5JP0-RXPs; and World Economic Forum, NatureInspired Design: How the Amazon Can Help Us Solve Humanitys Greatest Challenges, June 2017, available at:
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/06/bio-inspired-design-amazon-technology/.
31. Copernicus initiative website, viewed December 2017, available at: http://www.copernicus.eu/.
32. Planet Labs, Medium Resolution Monitoring, viewed December 2017, available at: https://www.planet.com/
products/monitoring/.
33. Data for Climate Action, viewed December 2017, available at: http://www.dataforclimateaction.org/. See in particular
thematic award winners Predicting and Alleviating Road Flooding for Climate Mitigation.
34. The Future of Life Institute, Killer Robots: Worlds Top AI and Robotics Companies Urge United Nations to Ban Lethal
Autonomous Weapons, August 2017, available at: https://futureoflife.org/2017/08/20/killer-robots-worlds-top-airobotics-companies-urge-united-nations-ban-lethal-autonomous-weapons/.
35. Goldman Sachs Economic Research, Self-Driving Cars Could Cost Americas Professional Drivers up to 25,000
Jobs a Month, Goldman Sachs Says, March 2017, reported in CNBC article, available at: https://www.cnbc.
com/2017/05/22/goldman-sachs-analysis-of-autonomous-vehicle-job-loss.html.
36. Schwab, Klaus, The Fourth Industrial Revolution, 2016: highlights on data ethics.
37. Partnership on AI, available at: https://www.partnershiponai.org/.
38. Joppa, Lucas N., The Case for Technology Investments in the Environment, Nature, available at: https://www.nature.
com/articles/d41586-017-08675-7.
39. Smith, Brad, AI for Earth Can Be Game-Changer for Our Planet, Microsoft, available at: https://blogs.microsoft.com/
on-the-issues/2017/12/11/ai-for-earth-can-be-a-game-changer-for-our-planet/.

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth

27

The World Economic Forum,
committed to improving
the state of the world, is the
International Organization for
Public-Private Cooperation.
The Forum engages the
foremost political, business
and other leaders of society
to shape global, regional
and industry agendas.

World Economic Forum
9193 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland
Tel.: +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.org

