2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom)

An Inference Mechanism Using Bayes-based
Classifiers in Pregnancy Care
Mrio W. L. Moreira1,2, Joel J. P. C. Rodrigues1,3,4, Antonio M. B. Oliveira2, Kashif Saleem4, Augusto V. Neto5
1

Instituto de Telecomunicaes, Universidade da Beira Interior (UBI), Covilh, Portugal
Instituto Federal de Educao, Cincia e Tecnologia do Cear (IFCE), Aracati, Brazil
3
National Institute of Telecommunications (INATEL), Santa Rita do Sapuca, MG, Brazil
4
University of Fortaleza (UNIFOR), Fortaleza, CE, Brazil
4
Center of Excellence in Information Assurance (CoEIA), King Saud University (KSU), Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
5
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Natal, RN, Brazil
2

mario.moreira@it.ubi.pt; joeljr@ieee.org; amauroboliveira@gmail.com; ksaleem@ksu.edu.sa; augusto@dimap.ufrn.br

Abstract Significant advances on smart decision support
systems (DSSs) development have influenced important results
on pregnancy care. Nevertheless, even considering the efforts to
reduce the number of women deaths due to problems related to
pregnancy, this decrease presented less impact than other areas
of human development. Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy,
particularly pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, account for significant
proportion of perinatal morbidity and maternal mortality. In this
context, this paper proposes an inference model that uses data
mining (DM) techniques capable for operating in a data set to
extract patterns and assist in knowledge discovery. Identifying
hypertensive crises that complicate pregnancy, it can impact in a
meaningful reduction the incidence of sequelae and death of
pregnant women. Comparison between two Bayesian classifiers is
performed in this work to better classify the hypertensive
disorders severity. Results showed that Nave Bayes classifier had
an excellent performance, presenting better precision and
F-measure, compared to the other experimented classifiers. Even
finding a good performance to predict hypertensive disorders,
other Bayesian methods need to be evaluated, as well as other
DM techniques such as those based on artificial intelligence (AI)
and tree-based methods.
Keywords eHealth; Hypertension; Pregnancy; Decision
Support Systems; Data Mining; Bayes Methods

I.

INTRODUCTION

According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy afflict about 10% of all
pregnancies around the world. These are the leading causes of
morbidity, disability, and death among mothers and babies [1].
These complications during pregnancy were an important
cause of mortality in Latin America and the Caribbean,
contributing to 22.1% of all maternal deaths in this region [2].
With providing timely and efficient care, the majority of deaths
related to these complications could be avoided. Thus,
optimization of health care for pregnant women to prevent and
treat hypertensive disorders is needed.
As reported by the National High Blood Pressure Education
Program, hypertension in pregnancy is classified into one of

978-1-5090-3370-6/16/$31.00 2016 IEEE

the following five categories: (i) Chronic hypertension, (ii)
Preeclampsia, (iii) Chronic hypertension with superimposed
preeclampsia, (iv) Gestational hypertension, and (v) Transient
hypertension [3]. These categories are critical to differentiating
preeclampsia, a pregnancy-specific syndrome of exaggerated
vasoconstriction and reduced organ perfusion, from preexisting chronic hypertension. Nevertheless, this complex
multifactorial syndrome, that occurs in about 5 to 7% of
pregnancies worldwide, has not an etymology established yet,
i.e., this disease has still no agreement about its classification
as well as on the timing of its occurrence during pregnancy. To
evaluate this disorder is necessary to define the blood pressure
status. If the pregnant woman is hypertensive, the health expert
assesses its severity, possible secondary causes, and damage
presence in organs, to plan treatment strategies. The treatment
of chronic cases in the first trimester of pregnancy is critical
since fetal loss rate is about 50% and maternal mortality is
significant in these cases. Preeclampsia is more common in
pregnant women that already suffered from chronic
hypertension, with an incidence of approximately 25%. To
prevent more severe problems is recommendable the early
recognition of high-risk pregnancies, a constant clinical,
laboratory, and intensive monitoring when indicated. In this
sense, information and communication technologies (ICT) play
a key role to improve the quality of life of pregnant women.
With the development of intelligent systems for risk pregnancy
monitoring, health experts can identify serious problems
caused by gestational hypertension at its early stages, saving
lives of both mothers and babies. Several technology solutions
are already being deployed to combat preeclampsia in their
most critical condition [4], [5]. Many approaches have
achieved proper evaluation but are still unable to reduce the
critical situation of maternal and fetal deaths by themselves,
mainly, in developing countries. Smart DSSs are considered a
goof tool capable to contribute to this goal. Then, this paper
proposes an inference model that uses data mining (DM)
techniques capable for operating in a data set to extract patterns
and assist in knowledge discovery. Identifying hypertensive
crises that complicate pregnancy, it can impact in a meaningful

2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom)

reduction the incidence of sequelae and death of pregnant
women.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents
related works discussing used methods on identifying high-risk
pregnancies. Section III presents two modeling proposals that
use Bayes-based classifiers capable of identifying hypertensive
disorders as from its symptoms. Section IV performs the
performance evaluation study of these methods and the results
analysis considering the proposed plans. Finally, Section V
provides the conclusion and suggestions for further works.
II. RELATED WORK
This topic discusses recent works that are significant efforts
to identify hypertensive disorders risks on pregnancy, and then,
researches that use Bayes-based classifiers to collect valuable
information from a data set.
LARIISA platform is an intelligence solution that aims to
specify and implement, from an analytical and experimental
study of DM methods, data warehouse, ontologies, and
mashups [6]. It provides governance intelligence in the
decision-making process in five traditional areas of
management (systemic, legal, functional, clinical, and care).
The knowledge management framework is the platform
component responsible for turning it in a basis for building
smart systems. This segment considers three blocks, namely,
inference engine, semantic search, and DM. The intelligence
management model comprises the adequacy of the mining
block data to the knowledge management component
(Intelligence). Comparative analysis of pattern recognition
algorithms requires a deep study to define which is the bestsuited DM model. Moreover, it is also important to analyze
how the system should (or not) learn after the inclusion of new
information using ML techniques. Taking into account this
information classification performance evaluation can be
executed.
Recent studies found hereditary factors in occurrence of
preeclampsia. Dutta et al. conduct a study about critical genes
that cause preeclampsia using microarray gene expression data
[7]. In this research, a matrix with rows representing genes and
columns representing expression levels of the genes is
obtained. This method performs meta-heuristic algorithms
assessment, to know the Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS)
and the Differential Evolution (DE) in the critical genes
identification. The k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) algorithm
determines the fitness of set key genes to classify samples into
normal and diseased states. Results showed that the DE
approach outperforms the other method regarding best fitness
values and average when executed at the same runtime.
The leading causes of preeclampsia are not known.
However, its risk factors have been already defined. Cheng et
al. study the effects of these risk factors on the gestational age
[8]. The authors examined whether the consequences of these
factors are different on preeclampsia and gestational
hypertension. This method applies varying coefficient models
in this approach. Results showed that these effects behave
differently between these two groups. As the criterion to assess
the accuracy of the estimated varying coefficient model, the
relative error was used.

The presence of the diastolic notch in the Doppler of
uterine artery is the best predictive signal after twenty weeks of
pregnancy. Das et al. propose a method based on Doppler
signal analysis to identify automatically high-risk pregnancy
conditions with higher sensitivity even when the clinical
parameters are presenting healthy state [9]. The acquisition of
uterine artery signals from both women with healthy and atrisk pregnancy is made using a color-based Doppler ultrasound
system. An algorithm extracts characteristics from the Doppler
flow waveform and compares them between the two types of
pregnancies. This study presented the possibility of identifying
changes in the quantity of the blood supply to the fetus,
improving the performance of the Doppler uterine artery
investigation in high-risk pregnancies.
III. MODELING PROPOSALS USING BAYES-BASED CLASSIFIERS
Hypertension in pregnancy occurs when there are highpressure levels in pregnant women. Pregnancy-induced
hypertension refers to the onset of hypertension as a result of
pregnancy, occurring after 20 weeks of pregnancy and
disappearing until six weeks after childbirth. Hypertension is
the increase of blood pressure above 140/90mmHg. With the
pregnant woman seated, the health expert should measure the
blood pressure and confirm, after the rest period, for three
times. Gestational hypertension diagnosis occurs when
diastolic blood pressure is above 90mmHg or when it has a
blood pressure increase above 15 mmHg of the value measured
before first 20 weeks of gestation. Preeclampsia is the
hypertension occurrence accompanied by loss of protein in the
urine (proteinuria) after 20 pregnancy weeks with or no edema.
About the protein loss, significant proteinuria is considered
with the values equal or greater than 300mg of protein in urine
collected for 24 hours. The diagnosis is clinical and laboratory:
measurement of blood pressure, edema examination, and
protein quantity in urine. Figure 1 shows a graphical
contextualization of preeclampsia within hypertensive
disorders.

Fig. 1. Preeclampsia contextualization scheme.

2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom)

A. The Nave Bayes Classifier
The Nave Bayes classifier is applicable in health care
when there is a set of attributes that represents each risk factor.
Each one of these attributes occurs in a particular disorder
hypertensive. This classifier based on Bayes theorem is used to
determine the probability of each hypertensive disease from
symptoms never seen based on training examples.
Shaikh et al. develop an intelligent DSS using DM
techniques to predict heart diseases [10]. This system uses an
application based on the Nave Bayes classifier in which
patient answers predefined questions. It uses hidden data of a
database and compares the user answers with a training data
set. Results showed that this smart system can assist healthcare
practitioners in the decision-making clinical process which
other conventional decision support systems cannot.
According to a Bayes-based method, this work aims to
classify new cases according to its most probable classification
of hypertensive disorder in pregnancy given its set of
using the Equation (1).
symptoms

(1)
is the case with maximum a posteriori
In the Eq. (1),
probability, i.e., one that generates better results for data sets
never seen before, considering the occurred training period.
First of all, it is necessary to estimate from the training set, the
that is straightforward to determine.
probability
However, assuming that this set is limited in terms of size, it
because there
becomes difficult to predict
are probably few or no occurrence identical in the training set.
If the training set is too large, this second probability could be
well estimated. The Nave Bayes classifier makes a
simplification assuming that attributed values to the symptoms
are independent, i.e., the probability of observing
is precisely the product of the probabilities associated with
each attribute, as shown in equation (2).

(2)

Thus, the Nave Bayes classifier is a simplification, which
is given by equation (3).

(3)

Figure 2 illustrates graphically the structure of Nave Bayes
classifier.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the Nave Bayes classifier structure where each node
representing a symptom is independent.

B. The Averaged One-dependence Estimators classifier
(AODE)
The Averaged One-dependence Estimators classifier
(AODE) adopts another approach to minimize the dependence
of attributes. In fact, it extends the structure of the Naive Bayes
classifier also including the relationship of each attribute to
with other. Figure 3 illustrates this model. This method shows
the influence of characteristics to each other, unlike the
previous classifier. In [11], the authors discuss the AODE
classifier, considering it as one of the most attractive semiNave Bayesian classifiers and, hence, a great alternative to the
Nave Bayes classifier. This promising classifier obtains low
error rates, maintaining under control the computational
complexity. Results show the importance of selecting a proper
number of nodes on the learning of both classifiers. The
number of nodes is decisive to provide accurate results.
In healthcare, Kovcs and Hajdu use a novel strategy for
the segmentation of the vascular system in retina images [12].
Based on the Hidden Markov Random Fields approach, this
work considers the tangent vector field of the image to improve
the connectivity of the vascular system. Thus, it extends the
optimization problem of this model. To improve the probability
estimation during the solution of this optimization problem, the
AODE classifier is used instead of the well-known Nave
Bayes classifier, because it uses a weaker assumption than the
total independence of nodes. Figure 3 shows the AODE
classifier structure in which each attribute has relations with
others.
This method seeks to estimate the probability of each class
,
given a specified set of features
using the equation (4).

(4)

2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom)

In the eq. (3), denotes an estimate of . represents the
rate in which the argument appears in the sample data. A term
to be used in the
must have minimum frequency
summation. Usually, is set at 1.

TABLE II. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF THE AODE CLASSIFIER.
TP
Rate
0.333
0.714
0.000
0.167

FP
Rate
0.316
0.167
0.158
0.263

Precision

Recall

F-measure

0.250
0.625
0.000
0.167

0.333
0.714
0.000
0.167

0.286
0.677
0.000
0.167

ROC
Area
0.675
0.794
0.412
0.623

Class
CH
P
OP
GH

CH (Chronic hypertension), P (Preeclampsia), OP (Chronic hypertension with superimposed
preeclampsia), and GH (Gestational hypertension)

Table III presents the performance evaluation of both
approaches using a weighted average.
TABLE III. GLOBAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF
BOTH BAYES-BASED CLASSIFIERS

Fig. 3. Illustration of the AODE classifier structure where each attribute has

NB
AODE

TP
Rate
0.400
0.320

FP
Rate
0.195
0.224

Precision

Recall

F-measure

0.400
0.275

0.400
0.320

0.397
0.295

ROC
Area
0.667
0.633

relations with others.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND RESULT ANALYSIS
The healthcare dataset used for classification includes
twenty-five hypertension disorders cases, each one with eleven
attributes provided by health experts.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed approaches,
the 5-fold cross-validation method was used. This technique
assesses the ability of generalization of a model from a data set.
In problems where the goal of the modeling is the prediction,
this method is widely used. The primary aim is to estimate how
much a model is accurate. This research used a confusion
matrix, the cross-validation approach, and the F-measure to
evaluate the accuracy of the models constructed by both
classifiers. The confusion matrix is a table where TP (true
positives), TN (true negatives), FP (false positives), and FN
(false negatives) are represented. The cross-validation method
allows the use of all the database data for training and testing.
This work adopted five folds in this method. F-measure is the
mean between precision and recall, measuring the ability to
recognize negative and positive cases.
Based on [13], this work has chosen the best nodes for
modeling. The main symptoms presented in pregnant women
suffering from hypertensive disorders are a headache,
epigastric pain, nausea or vomiting, blurred vision, giddiness,
hyperreflexia, edema, oliguria, hypertension, and proteinuria.
These are the nodes that make up the proposed model. Tables I
and II show the evaluation results of both methods.
TABLE I.
TP
Rate
0.333
0.714
0.167
0.333

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF THE NAVE BAYES CLASSIFIER.
FP
Rate
0.211
0.111
0.158
0.316

Precision

Recall

F-measure

0.333
0.714
0.250
0.250

0.333
0.714
0.167
0.333

0.333
0.714
0.200
0.286

ROC
Area
0.684
0.817
0.509
0.632

Class
CH
P
OP
GH

Figure 4 shows the ROC (Receiver Operator Characteristic)
curve. The ROC curves describe the discriminative ability of a
diagnostic experiment. It allows highlighting the values in
which there is further optimization of the sensitivity according
to the specificity. The point in a receiver operator characteristic
curve where this happens is the one that is nearest to top left of
the diagram. Optimal models show points closest to the point
(0,1).

Fig. 4. Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curve presenting the Nave
Bayes classifier (yellow line), the AODE classifier (blue), and the meeting
between these curves (green).

The Nave Bayes classifier showed the same value for the
accuracy and F-measure equal to 0.714, while the AODE
classifier presented 0.625 and 0.677, respectively. Both
classifiers achieved the same performance for the recall of
0.714. These classifiers also presented a ROC area of 0.817
(Naive Bayes) and 0.794 (AODE). Great models present results
for this indicator close to 1.000. In comparison with other

2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom)

works, in general, with [8] and [14], that show an accuracy
about 0.860 and 0.836 respectively, this proposal presents a
good performance given the small amount of used data. The
Kappa statistic evaluates the prediction performance of
classifiers, deducting the expected number of correct results.
The Nave Bayes classifier had a performance of 0.1987, while
the AODE classifier had a performance of 0.0899. A possible
performance interpretation of these proposed models, from
Kappa statistics, comes from the fact that the presented results
had a reasonable performance.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper discussed a model for hypertensive diseases in
risk pregnancies using DM techniques. For identification of the
mortality leading cause during pregnancy, namely, the
preeclampsia, two classifiers were considered and evaluated.
Both of them presented a good performance. The main result of
this study shown that minimizing the dependence of all the
attributes they reduced the accuracy of the model. Further
works will discuss the relationship between nodes, and they
will evaluate other classifiers. Decision trees and AI based
classifiers can be the key to find a better relationship between
nodes, making possible a more precise model. Experimenting
these models on a larger database will also show if the amount
of data positively affects the accuracy.
This work was an initial effort to develop a better
intelligent mechanism, which aims to provide smart
governance in the decision-making process by various actors in
the public health area. For health professionals that work with
pregnancy is important to be conscious of the medical history
and changes in the pregnant woman's clinical state because
these changes may not come always with a high blood
pressure, complicating the decision-making process. A more
specialized care is essential for preeclampsia monitoring with
the purpose to personalize assistance for the prevention,
promotion, and health recovery. To minimize complications
and fatal consequences specific strategies with agility and
efficiency are needed. In this context, information and
communication technologies are essential and play a key role
to reduce these consequences.
ACNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been partially supported by the Instituto de
Telecomunicaes, Next Generation Networks and Applications
Group (NetGNA), Portugal, by National Funding from the FCT Fundao para a Cincia e a Tecnologia through the
UID/EEA/50008/2013 Project, by Finep, with resources from
Funttel, Grant No. 01.14.0231.00, under the Radiocommunication
Reference Center (Centro de Referncia em Radiocomunicaes CRR) project of the National Institute of Telecommunications
(Instituto Nacional de Telecomunicaes - Inatel), Brazil, by the
National Plan of Science, Technology and Innovation
(MAARIFAH), King Abdulaziz City for Science and
Technology, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Award Number (12INF2817-02), and by Cincias sem Fronteiras of Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientfico e Tecnolgico (CNPq),
Brazil, through the process number 207706/2014-0.

REFERENCES
[1] WHO, Recommendations for Prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia
and eclampsia, WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data, Geneva,
Switzerland, 2011.
[2] L. Say, D. Chou, A. Gemmill, . Tunalp, A. Moller, J. Daniels, A. M.
Glmezoglu, M. Temmerman, and L. Alkema, Global causes of
maternal death: a WHO systematic analysis, The Lancet Global Health,
Vol. 2, N. 6, pp. 323-333, 2014.
[3] National High Blood Pressure Education Program, The Seventh Report
of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation,
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda (MD), USA, 2004.
[4] J. F. Torrado, I. Farro, F. Farro, D. Bia, Y. Zocalo, C. Sosa, S. Scasso, S.
Zunini, R. L. Armentano, and J. Alonso, Carotid-radial pulse wave
velocity as an alternative tool for the evaluation of endothelial function
during pregnancy: potential role in identifying hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy, 34th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC 2012), San Diego
(CA), USA, Aug. 28  Sept. 1, 2012, pp. 54735474.
[5] H. D. Tagare, K. Rood, and I. A. Buhimschi, An algorithm to screen for
preeclampsia using a smart phone, IEEE Healthcare Innovation
Conference (HIC 2014), Seattle (WA), USA, Oct. 8-10, 2014, pp. 52-55.
[6] M. Oliveira, L. O. M. Andrade, M. Santos, G. Teles, and N. Agoulmine,
Towards a cost-effective homecare for a public health management
system in Brazil, IEEE 16th International Conference on e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services (HEALTHCOM 2014), Natal,
Brazil, Oct. 15-18, 2014, pp. 206211.
[7] J. Dutta, S. Biswas, S. Saha, and S. Acharyya, Identification of DiseaseCritical Genes Causing Preeclampsia: Meta-heuristic Approaches, IEEE
UP Section Conference on Electrical Computer and Electronics (UPCON
2015), Allahabad, Dec. 4-6, 2015, pp. 16.
[8] W. Cheng, L. Fang, L. Yang, H. Zhao, P. Wang, and J. Yan, Varying
Coefficient Models for Analyzing the Effects of Risk Factors on
Pregnant Womens Blood Pressure, 13th International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA 2015), Detroit (MI), Dec.
3-5, 2014, pp. 5560.
[9] R. Das, P. Vajinepalli, R. Sisodia, and L. Gupta, Automatic doppler
signal analysis to assess utero-placental circulation for identifying high
risk pregnancies, 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS 2013), Osaka,
Japan, July 3-7, 2013, pp. 39053908.
[10] S. Shaikh, A. Sawant, S. Paradkar, K. Patil, and A. E. System,
Electronic Recording System-Heart Disease Prediction System,
International Conference on Technologies for Sustainable Development
(ICTSD2015), Mumbai, India, Feb. 4-6, 2015, pp. 26.
[11] M. J. Flores, J. A. Gmez, A. M. Martnez, and A. Salmern, Mixture
of truncated exponentials in supervised classification: Case study for the
naive Bayes and averaged one-dependence estimators classifiers,
International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications
(ISDA 2011), Crdoba, Spain, Nov. 22-24, 2011, pp. 593598.
[12] G. Kovcs and A. Hajdu, Extraction of vascular system in retina images
using Averaged One-Dependence Estimators and orientation estimation
in Hidden Markov Random Fields, IEEE International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro (ISBI 2011), Chicago (IL),
USA, March 30  April 2, 2011, pp. 693696.
[13] M. W. Moreira, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, A. M. Oliveira, R. F. Ramos, and
K. Saleem, A Preeclampsia Diagnosis Approach using Bayesian
Networks, IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC
2016), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, May 23-27, 2016, pp. 1432-1436.
[14] C. K. Neocleous, P. Anastasopoulos, K. H. Nikolaides, C. N. Schizas,
and K. C. Neokleous, Neural networks to estimate the risk for
preeclampsia occurrence, International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN 2009), Atlanta (GA), USA, June 14-19, 2009, pp.
2221-2225.

