JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY

VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017

 2017 BY THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER

ISSN 0735-1097/$36.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2017.03.571

REVIEW TOPIC OF THE WEEK

Articial Intelligence in
Precision Cardiovascular Medicine
Chayakrit Krittanawong, MD,a,b HongJu Zhang, PHD,c Zhen Wang, PHD,d,e Mehmet Aydar, PHD,b,f
Takeshi Kitai, MD, PHDb,g

ABSTRACT
Articial intelligence (AI) is a eld of computer science that aims to mimic human thought processes, learning
capacity, and knowledge storage. AI techniques have been applied in cardiovascular medicine to explore novel
genotypes and phenotypes in existing diseases, improve the quality of patient care, enable cost-effectiveness, and
reduce readmission and mortality rates. Over the past decade, several machine-learning techniques have been
used for cardiovascular disease diagnosis and prediction. Each problem requires some degree of understanding of
the problem, in terms of cardiovascular medicine and statistics, to apply the optimal machine-learning algorithm. In
the near future, AI will result in a paradigm shift toward precision cardiovascular medicine. The potential of AI in
cardiovascular medicine is tremendous; however, ignorance of the challenges may overshadow its potential clinical
impact. This paper gives a glimpse of AIs application in cardiovascular clinical care and discusses its potential role
in facilitating precision cardiovascular medicine. (J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;69:265764)  2017 by the American
College of Cardiology Foundation.

I

n the near future, articial intelligence (AI) tech-

to be stored, analyzed, and used. AI has the potential

niques, such as machine learning, deep learning,

to exploit big data and be used in advanced patient

and cognitive computing, may play a critical role

care. In fact, cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are com-

in the evolution of cardiovascular (CV) medicine to

plex and heterogeneous in nature, as they are caused

facilitate precision CV medicine. CV clinical care

by multiple genetic, environmental (e.g., air pollu-

currently faces practical challenges pertaining to

tion), and behavioral factors (e.g., diet and gut micro-

cost reductions in prevention and treatment, low

biome). At present, many more advancements need

cost-effectiveness, overutilization, inadequate pa-

to be made to predict outcomes accurately and effec-

tient care, and high readmission and mortality rates.

tively, rather than assessing a simple score system or

Productive interactions between physicians and data

traditional CV risk factors. Deep-learning AI is a new

scientists are needed to enable clinically meaningful

machine-learning technique that plays a vital role in

automated and predictive data analysis. To date, big

areas such as image recognition (e.g., Facebooks

data, such as omics data, human gut microbiome

facial recognition system [Menlo Park, California],

sequencing, social media, and cardiac imaging, are

self-driving cars, speech recognition (e.g., Apples

too large and heterogeneous, and change too quickly,

Siri [Cupertino, California], Google Brain [Mountain

Listen to this manuscripts
audio summary by

From the aDepartment of Internal Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai St. Lukes and Mount Sinai West, New York,

JACC Editor-in-Chief

New York; bDepartment of Cardiovascular Medicine, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; cDivision of

Dr. Valentin Fuster.

Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; dRobert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for
the Science of Health Care Delivery; eDivision of Health Care Policy and Research, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; fDepartment of Computer Science at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio; and the gDepartment of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe, Japan. The authors have reported that they have no
relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose. Bijoy K. Khandheria, MD, served as Guest Editor for this paper.
Manuscript received March 12, 2017; accepted March 22, 2017.

2658

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

ABBREVIATIONS

View, California], Amazons Alexa Voice

processing of big data to make predictions or decisions

AND ACRONYMS

[Seattle, Washington]), Google DeepMind

using AI has the potential to transform the current

AlphaGo, mobile apps (e.g., Cardiogram app

practice of clinical care. Big data analytics using AI

[San Francisco, California]), machine vision

may potentially facilitate identication of novel ge-

software in cameras, IBM Watson (North

notypes or phenotypes of heterogeneous syndromes,

Castle,

Deep-

such as HFpEF, Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, hyper-

learning AI using big data can be used in

trophic cardiomyopathy, primary pulmonary hyper-

pattern recognition in heterogeneous syn-

tension (PH), hypertension (HTN), and coronary artery

dromes and image recognition in CV imaging.

disease, leading to personalized, targeted therapy. Big

For example, AI can classify new genotypes

data analytics using AI can also support important

CVD = cardiovascular disease

or phenotypes of heart failure (HF) with pre-

clinical decisions, such as selection of antiplatelet

ECG = electrocardiographic

served ejection fraction (HFpEF), and novel

agents in individuals who are postpercutaneous

EHR = electronic health record

diagnostic

parameters

coronary intervention, anticoagulant agents in in-

HF = heart failure

could potentially lead to novel targeted ther-

dividuals with nonvalvular atrial brillation (AF), and

HFpEF = heart failure with

apy. In addition, to date, 2-dimensional

pharmacogenomics in individuals. Furthermore, big

preserved ejection fraction

speckle-tracking echocardiography (2D-STE)

data analytics has the potential to identify unknown

HTN = hypertension

quantitation cannot sufciently assess left

risk factors for acute coronary syndrome (ACS),

RNN = recurrent neural

ventricular ejection fraction because left ven-

spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD), or

network

tricular ejection fraction is commonly calcu-

Brugada syndrome, and even the controversial issue

SCAD = spontaneous coronary

lated by manually tracing boundaries or via

of statins in the older population (age >75 years).

artery dissection

the time-honored eyeball method, which

Although big data utilization in CV medicine is still in

lack reproducibility and precision. Therefore,

its infancy, big data analytics have recently been

AI may improve the accuracy of 2D-STE

implemented in CV medicine.

ACS = acute coronary
syndrome

AF = atrial brillation
AI = articial intelligence
ANN = articial neural network
AUC = area under the curve
CV = cardiovascular

STE = speckle-tracking
echocardiography

SVM = support vector machine

New

York),

and

robots.

echocardiographic

quantitation

and

other

cardiac

imaging

methods. In the 21st century, the paradigm is shifting
from traditional statistical tools to the use of AI in CV
medicine to enable precision CV medicine. Big data
can be used to automatically generate new hypotheses, instead of physicians having to initiate hypotheses. In our opinion, rather than replacing physicians,
AI will assist them in making better clinical decisions.
The objective of this paper is to outline the role of AI
applications,

such

as

machine

learning,

deep

learning, and cognitive computing, in enabling precision CV medicine, and discuss the potential future direction of AI in clinical practice. Going forward,
future studies in CV research should focus on more
complex and heterogeneous diseases using AI by
moving beyond traditional statistical tools. To illustrate some of the points addressed here, this paper focuses on examples of AI algorithms in CV medicine.

BIG DATA

TRADITIONAL

STATISTICS

VERSUS

MACHINE

LEARNING. In the big data realm, AI techniques, such

as machine learning, are revolutionizing the way
physicians make clinical decisions and diagnosis, and
have the potential to improve the estimated CVD risk
scores to automate prediction. In traditional statistics, such as the logistic regression model, the
c-statistic is a standard measure of predictive accuracy. However, current predictive scores, such as
congestive HF, hypertension, age $75 years, diabetes
mellitus, and prior stroke, vascular disease, age 65 to
74 years, and sex category (CHA 2DS2-VASc), dual antiplatelet therapy, and the Framingham risk score,
were developed using large trials or cohorts with
ill-dened moderated values of c-statistics (e.g., 0.79
for men in Framingham risk score, 0.83 for women in
Framingham risk score, 0.65 for CHA2DS2 -VASc score,
0.66 for Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial
Fibrillation, 0.70 and 0.68, respectively, in the
ischemic and bleeding models in dual antiplatelet

The term big data refers to extremely large datasets

therapy) (14). Although the dual antiplatelet therapy

that cannot be analyzed, searched, interpreted, or

study involved 25,682 patients at 452 sites in 11

stored using traditional data-processing methods. Big

countries, big data analytics using precision medicine

data include data from mobile phone applications,

platforms could involve millions of patients for

wearable technology, social media, environmental

exploration and validation. In 2013, the American

and

sociodemographics,

Heart Association/American College of Cardiology

omic data (e.g., genomics, metabolomics, prote-

guideline was developed by estimating atheroscle-

omics), and data from standardized electronic health

rotic CVD using the pooled cohort equations from

records (EHRs) or precision medicine platforms.

sex- and race-specic proportional hazards models,

Whereas big data by themselves are useless, the

but its c-statistics are not well-dened in African

lifestyle-related

factors,

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

Americans (0.713 in men and 0.818 in women) (5).

known as sample size in traditional statistics) and the

Cook et al. (6) reviewed the guideline and found

right algorithms to optimize its performance on the

overestimation of the pooled cohort equations in

training dataset before testing. In traditional statis-

primary prevention external cohorts. They subse-

tics, alpha should not be more than 0.05, whereas in

quently suggested that real-time calibration of risk

machine learning, there should be no undertting

prediction equations is feasible with big data ana-

(suboptimal data) or overtting (noisy data). Over-

lytics (6). Therefore, the increasing availability of

tting commonly occurs when a model is excessively

automated real-time decision support tools using AI

complex relative to the size of the training dataset

applications in EHRs will likely reduce the need for

(i.e., too many parameters) that may not be valid for

simple scoring systems such as these.

the testing dataset. For example, for a machine trying
to learn what SCAD or acute myocardial infarction is,

MACHINE LEARNING

we start by training it with keywords such as chest

Machine learning, a popular subdiscipline of AI, rep-

factors, and h/o bromuscular dysplasia; the ma-

resents various techniques for solving complicated

chine detects in the initial phase that all SCAD fea-

problems with big data by identifying interaction

tures have chest pain, female, age 30 to 50,

patterns among variables. In contrast to traditional

physical/emotional factors, and h/o bromuscular

statistics, machine learning is focused on building

dysplasia. If training continues with the same key

automated clinical decision systems (such as read-

words, the machine may also falsely deduce that all

pain, female, age 30 to 50, physical/emotional

mission and mortality score systems) that help phy-

SCAD features must have chest pain, female,

sicians make more accurate predictions, rather than

age 30 to 50, and h/o bromuscular dysplasia,

simple estimated score systems.

and that all chest pain, female, age 30 to 50,

Machine learning can be categorized into 3 learning

and history bromuscular dysplasia are SCAD. This

types: supervised; unsupervised; and reinforcement.

may

In supervised learning, algorithms use a dataset

myocardial infarction or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy,

labeled by humans to predict the desired and

which is called overtting to data. In contrast, AI may

known outcome. Supervised learning is great for

potentially exclude SCAD in men, SCAD without

classication and regression problems, but it requires

bromuscular dysplasia, or 51-year-old women with

a lot of data and is time-consuming because the data

SCAD. This problem is called undertting to data.

potentially

include

atherosclerotic

acute

have to be labeled by humans. Conversely, unsuper-

An excellent example of the use of machine

vised learning seeks to identify novel disease mecha-

learning is the prediction of the survival of patients

nisms,

hidden

with HFpEF. Shah et al. (7) created an unsupervised

patterns present in the data. In unsupervised learning,

genotypes,

or

phenotypes

from

learning model across 46 different variables to

the objective is to nd the hidden patterns in the data

identify intrinsic structures within patients with

without feedback from humans. For example, teach-

HFpEF; they identied 3 distinct groups. Subse-

ing medical residents (labels) before they see the pa-

quently, they performed supervised learning to pre-

tients can be termed supervised learning. In contrast,

dict the difference in desired outcomes (mortality and

allowing medical residents to see patients (no labels),

hospitalization) among the groups. However, the

then allowing them to learn from their mistakes (er-

limitation of unsupervised learning is that the initial

rors) and come up with their own plans (optimize) can

cluster pattern needs to be corrected without bias;

be termed unsupervised learning. Some algorithms,

therefore, the study needs to be validated with other

such as articial neural networks (ANNs), can be

cohorts.

trained using supervised or unsupervised learning to
optimize the accuracy of automated prediction. Last,

SUPERVISED LEARNING. Supervised learning algo-

reinforcement learning can be viewed as a hybrid of

rithms have been successfully applied to problems in

supervised and unsupervised learning. The aim of

the prediction, diagnosis, and treatment of CVD as

reinforcement learning is to maximize the accuracy of

well as image analysis in CV imaging. Various algo-

algorithms using trial and error.

rithms can be trained using supervised learning. For

Learning curves and area under the curve (AUC)

example, we trained a machine for 30 potential var-

are important considerations in the choice of a

iables (such as C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedi-

machine-learning algorithm, whereas c-statistics are

mentation rate, cysteine, QTc interval, E/A ratio, and

important in the choice of traditional data-processing

SYNTAX score [an angiographic tool]). Subsequently,

methods. As with traditional statistics, machine

the algorithms generated a prediction model using

learning requires sufcient training datasets (also

weighted variables from the training dataset. Next,

2659

2660

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

we applied the algorithms to a new dataset (testing

forest, have lower accuracy than ANN and SVM, but

dataset) to predict ACS risk; the machine then

are relatively easy to use and can be used with small

calculated the ACS risk from the 30 potential vari-

datasets. The decision tree algorithm is easy to un-

ables in the new dataset. The prediction accuracy

derstand and is unlikely to encounter overtting

depends on the algorithm, dataset, and hypothesis.

because of the relatively small dataset. It can be used

Different algorithms are appropriate for different

with a series of yes/no questions to classify data into

hypotheses, and so an understanding of the advan-

categories and also be used in clinical decision-

tages and disadvantages of each algorithm is required

making or CV risk prediction in simple tasks (12).

to apply it in the optimal manner and potentially test

The random forest algorithm is an extension of the

the hypotheses. Knowing the goals and the appro-

decision tree algorithm, in which decision trees are

priate techniques for hypotheses is critical for ma-

combined and each decision tree is independently

chine learning to be carried out effectively and

trained. Random forest algorithms have been used in

accurately.

coronary computed tomography angiography, read-

Algorithms that can be used in supervised learning

mission for HF patients, and HF risk and survival

include ANN, support vector machine (SVM), decision

prediction

tree, random forests, naive Bayes classier, fuzzy

forests can easily perform leave-1-out predictions

logic, and K-nearest neighbor (KNN). Each algorithm

(i.e., sensitivity analysis in meta-analysis) and are

has its own advantages and disadvantages. Super-

relatively robust to selection bias.

models

(1317).

In

addition,

random

vised learning problems can be categorized into clas-

The naive Bayes classier is a simple probabilistic

sication (predict categories), regression (predict

classier derived from Bayes theorem. It performs

values), and anomaly detection (predict unusual pat-

very well on small training datasets and can be used in

terns) problems. Factors for selecting optimal algo-

text classication problems, such as in CV risk factor

rithms include data characteristics, training time,

identication and decision-making systems (18,19).

learning curves, and number of parameters and fea-

Fuzzy logic functions are similar to human reasoning

tures. ANN and SVM are the 2 most popular algorithms

and decision-making in which logic returns values

because they are compatible with large and complex

(e.g., 10% possibility of SCAD, 30% possibility of acute

data (e.g., omic data) and can process data with

myocardial infarction, 15% possibility of pericarditis)

higher accuracy than other supervised learning

instead of straight true/false or yes/no answers (e.g.,

algorithms.

denitely SCAD and not SCAD). Fuzzy logic has been

ANNs, which mimic the human neuron concept,

used in various areas, such as for prediction of early-

perform well for image processing of electrocardio-

stage coronary artery disease, mortality prediction

graphic (ECG) and echocardiographic data. ANNs: 1)

after cardiac surgery, and cardiac arrhythmia detec-

can be used in nonlinear relations; 2) conditions

tion (2023). K-nearest neighbor is one of the simplest

where traditional statistical analyses fail; 3) have a

nonparametric methods. It executes quickly on small

higher predictive accuracy than linear or logistic

training datasets and can be used in ECG interpreta-

regression; 4) are very exible in various data types;

tion problems (24,25); however, K-nearest neighbor

and 5) can be used with deep-learning algorithms.

requires more space and time for large datasets.

Their limitations include: 1) data overtting; 2)
lengthy computation time; and 3) having more parameters than most supervised learning algorithms.
In contrast to ANNs, SVMs are less prone to overtting and need less memory. They have been shown
to perform well for text classication in EHRs and
pattern recognition in echocardiographic imaging to
stratify CV risk and help physicians make decisions
(8,9). In addition, an SVM is feasible for nonlinear
data or large and complex data, such as omic data,
because kernel functions, a shortcut to expedite
learning process, can be applied to SVMs to enhance
their accuracy and reduce processing time (10,11).
However, selection of kernel functions is very
important, as the wrong choice can lead to an in-

LIMITATIONS OF SUPERVISED LEARNING. In super-

vised learning, small training datasets can lead to
inaccurate decisions in testing datasets if the training
datasets are biased; therefore, supervised learning
requires large datasets to train the model and validation by other datasets. Supervised learning also requires the training datasets to be manually labeled to
predict only known output results (e.g., mortality and
readmission rate). Furthermore, even though multiple
functions can t a given training dataset on which
supervised learning subsequently makes assumptions
about the best function that ts the data, it can
cause bias that guides the learning algorithm to prefer
to one hypothesis or function over another.

crease in the error percentage. Other algorithms, such

UNSUPERVISED

as decision tree, naive Bayes classier, and random

learning, unlabeled data are used to predict unknown

LEARNING. In

unsupervised

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

results and the algorithm has to determine how to

promising. Deep learning can be very powerful in im-

discover the hidden patterns in the dataset. Unsu-

age recognition (e.g., facial recognition in Facebook,

pervised learning is often used in deep learning, and

image search in Google), and can potentially be used in

has been implemented in self-driving vehicles and

CV imaging (e.g., 2D-STE, 3D-STE, angiography, car-

robots as well as being used in speech- and pattern-

diac magnetic resonance). It can also be trained in an

recognition applications. In CV clinical care, unsu-

unsupervised manner for unsupervised learning tasks

pervised deep learning with 2D- and 3-dimensional

(e.g., novel drug-drug interaction). Furthermore, there

(3D)-STE data may enable identication of novel

is no limitation on working memory. It also works well

phenotypes of cardiomyopathy or HFpEF, and can

with noisy data, such as strain imaging and 3D-STE

potentially be used in precision medicine platforms or

data. Deep-learning algorithms will facilitate use of

the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institutes Trans-

articial real-time CV imaging with better spatial and

Omics for Precision Medicine program to identify

temporal resolution, potentially improving the quality

genotypes of HTN or ACS. The algorithms used

of care and reducing costs.

in unsupervised learning can be classied into:

Deep learning has recently been implemented in

1) clustering algorithms; and 2) association rule-

CV medicine, more specically, in CV imaging. Deep

learning algorithms. Clustering algorithms can be

learning with neuronal network algorithms can be

used to cluster unlabeled data into different groups.

recurrent neural networks (RNN), convolutional, and

A cluster is a collection of data items that are similar

deep neural networks. Wang and Kong (26) used a

to 1 cluster and dissimilar to other clusters and is

supervised convolutional neural network model to

used when there are no obvious natural groupings, in

predict end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes in

which case the data may be difcult to explore. For

cardiac magnetic resonance. Convolutional neural

example, Google News can be shown to customers in

networks and RNN are dominant in image and speech

different ways to match their online lifestyles.

recognition. RNNs have proven effective in many

Association rule-learning algorithms help to uncover

difcult machine-learning tasks, such as image

relationships between seemingly unrelated data

captioning (27) and language translation (28). Choi

items. For example, 70% of patients who had angioe-

et al. (29) used an RNN to predict HF 9 months before

dema with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors

diagnosis made by physicians and found that the RNN

also have angioedema with angiotensin receptor-

(AUC: 0.777) was superior to supervised machine-

neprilysin inhibitors. Another example of an associa-

learning algorithms. Google developed a deep neural

tion rule is novel drug-drug interaction.

network known as Google DeepMind AlphaGo that

LIMITATIONS OF UNSUPERVISED LEARNING. One

defeated human champions in the Go game in March

major limitation of unsupervised learning is difculty

2016. Kannathal et al. (30) used a deep neural

identifying the initial cluster pattern, which could

network to classify the ECG signals of cardiac patients

potentially lead to biases. Because the nal cluster

into normal, abnormal, and life-threatening states,

pattern is dependent on the initial cluster pattern,

and found the classication to be correct in approxi-

this could result in inaccurate decisions. Therefore, it

mately 99% of test cases.

needs validation in several cohorts. In addition, some

Deep learning has proven to be better than other

complex problems lead to limitations that are not

machine-learning techniques, such as SVM, because

easily overcome without supervised training; thus, it

deep learning can use multiple layers and trans-

may require manually labeled data to identify the

formations, compared with the 2 layers used by SVM.

optimal algorithm. For example, noisy data, such as
3D-STE images, have to be manually denoised before

LIMITATIONS OF DEEP LEARNING. Deep learning is

predictions can be successful. Thus, for the best re-

usually nonlinear analysis and has many parameters

sults, unsupervised learning may require manual

and multiple layers; thus, overtting may be a major

hand coding in some parts, unsupervised algorithms

challenge that could lead to poor predictive perfor-

in other parts, and subsequent validation.

mance. Increasing the size of the training dataset or
decreasing the number of hidden layers may help to

DEEP LEARNING

avoid overtting. Deep learning also requires a large
training dataset, which necessitates collaboration

Deep learning mimics the operation of the human brain

between institutions and EHR linkage (e.g., the

using multiple layers of articial neuronal networks

American Heart Association Precision Medicine Plat-

that can generate automated predictions from input

form). Furthermore, deep-learning analysis requires

(training datasets). Deep learning has become a hot

deep-learningcapable machines, such as graphics

topic in AI because it is a growing eld and appears

processing unit-accelerated computing, for example,

2661

2662

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

C E NT R AL IL L U STR AT IO N Articial Intelligence in Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

Krittanawong, C. et al. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69(21):265764.

Big data (genetics, social media, environmental, and lifestyle-related factors, or omic data) can be stored through EHRs or precision medicine platforms, and can be
shared for data analysis with other physicians or researchers through secure cloud systems. Big data analytics using articial intelligence (machine learning, deep
learning, or cognitive computing) and 3 main types of learning algorithms (supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning) will enable precision cardiovascular
medicine. EHR  electronic health record.

NVIDIA DIGITS DevBox (Santa Clara, California) and

unsupervised deep learning may facilitate explora-

Amazon EC2. Setting up a neural network using deep-

tion of novel factors in score systems or add hidden

learning algorithms is also time-consuming. Finally,

risk factors to existing models. Second, deep learning

deep learning with multiple layers may increase the

can be used to classify novel genotypes and pheno-

training time without improvement in precision.

types from heterogeneous CVDs, such as HFpEF,

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF DEEP LEARNING. Deep

HTN, pulmonary hypertension, and cardiomyopathy.

learning can perform tasks without human assistance

Third, automated deep-learning prediction models

in industry (e.g., self-driving, playing Go, learning

can predict risk of bleeding and stroke by weighting

math to write math textbooks, reading scientic

between

publications to answer questions, watching movies to

abnormal renal function, abnormal liver function,

answer questions, machine vision software in cam-

stroke, bleeding, labile international normalized ra-

eras, phones, and robots). Implementation of deep

tios, elderly, drug therapy, and alcohol intake (known

learning in CV medicine includes the following. First,

as HAS-BLED) scores to facilitate optimal doses and

CHA 2DS2-VASc

and

the

hypertension,

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

anticoagulant therapy duration in nonvalvular AF

extend models with new pieces. Cognitive computing

patients. Fourth, deep learning may also help to

can leverage machine learning to extend the ability of

identify additional stroke risk factors (e.g., left atrial

HF

appendage, left atrial strain on echocardiography,

discover diagnosis patterns that they may not observe

real-time risks from wearables) and incorporate those

by themselves. Therefore, implementation of deep

factors into new models for anticoagulant therapy.

learning in cognitive computing systems can be used

Last, with deep learning, left ventricular ejection

for classication of novel diseases, genotypes, phe-

fraction may be predicted from ECG patterns or cor-

notypes, or unknown drug-drug interaction.

onary calcium score from echocardiography.

diagnosis

efciently

by

helping

physicians

CONCLUSIONS

COGNITIVE COMPUTING
The implementation of deep learning with unsuperCognitive computing involves self-learning systems

vised features for big data analytics holds signicant

using machine learning, pattern recognition, and

potential for identifying novel genotypes and pheno-

natural language processing to mimic the operation

types in heterogeneous CV diseases, such as Brugada

of human thought processes. In cognitive computing,

syndrome,

a system or device is trained by machine-learning or

white-coat hypertension, HTN, pulmonary hyperten-

deep-learning algorithms. The goal of cognitive

sion, familial AF, and metabolic syndrome. Further-

computing is to create automated computerized

more, the development of AI application and precision

models that can solve problems without human

medicine platforms will facilitate precision CV medi-

assistance (Central Illustration).

cine. In the future, cognitive computers, such as IBM

HFpEF,

Takotsubo

cardiomyopathy,

IBM Watson, a well-known example of cognitive

Watson, will be standard in health care facilities and

computing, continuously learns from datasets (e.g.,

assist physicians with their decision making and pre-

EHR, social media, stock market) and can predict out-

diction of patient outcomes. Many technology com-

comes using multiple algorithms more accurately than

panies, such as IBM, Apple, and Google, are investing

humans. Sengupta et al. (31) developed an associative

heavily in health care analytics to facilitate precision

memory classier, a cognitive computing machine-

medicine. We believe that AI will not replace physi-

learning algorithmic approach, to classify constric-

cians, but it is important that physicians know how to

tive pericarditis from restrictive cardiomyopathy, and

use AI sufciently to generate their hypotheses,

demonstrated its feasibility for automated interpre-

perform big data analytics, and optimize AI applica-

tation of STE data. An associative memory classier

tions in clinical practice to bring on the era of precision

(accuracy: 93.7%; AUC: 96.2%) proved to be better than

CV medicine. However, ignorance of the challenges of

random forest (accuracy: 88.3%; AUC: 94.2%) and SVM

AI may overshadow the impact of AI on CV medicine.

(accuracy: 87.4%; AUC: 92.2%). With a set of select STE

Machine learning, deep learning, and cognitive

variables, the associative memory classier achieved

computing are promising and can potentially change

an AUC of 89.2%. Four echocardiographic variables (e 0 ,

the way in which medicine is practiced, but physicians

E/e 0 , and septal and posterior wall thickness) had an

need to be prepared for the upcoming AI era.

AUC of 94.2%. Fifteen STE and 4 echocardiographic
variables (e0 , E/e0 , septal, and posterior left ventricle

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr. Chayakrit

wall thickness) showed incremental diagnostic value

Krittanawong, Department of Internal Medicine,

in

Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, St. Lukes

distinguishing

constrictive

pericarditis

from

and Mount Sinai West, 1000 10th Avenue, New York,

restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Cognitive computing systems can also reason
creatively about data, patterns, and situations, and

New York 10019. E-mail: Chayakrit.Krittanawong@
Mountsinai.org.

REFERENCES
1. Harrell FE Jr., Lee KL, Mark DB. Multivariable
prognostic models: issues in developing models,
evaluating assumptions and adequacy, and

3. van den Ham HA, Klungel OH, Singer DE,
Leufkens HG, van Staa TP. Comparative performance of ATRIA, CHADS2, and CHA2DS2-VASc

measuring and reducing errors. Stat Med 1996;15:
36187.

risk scores predicting stroke in patients with
atrial brillation: results from a national
primary care database. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;
66:18519.

2. DAgostino RB Sr., Pencina MJ, Massaro JM,
Coady S. Cardiovascular disease risk assessment:
insights from Framingham. Glob Heart 2013;8:
1123.

4. Yeh RW, Secemsky EA, Kereiakes DJ, et al.,
DAPT Study Investigators. Development and

validation of a prediction rule for benet and harm
of dual antiplatelet therapy beyond 1 year after
percutaneous coronary intervention. JAMA 2016;
315:173549.
5. Goff DC Jr., Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al.
2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. [Published

2663

2664

Krittanawong et al.

JACC VOL. 69, NO. 21, 2017
MAY 30, 2017:265764

Precision Cardiovascular Medicine

correction appears in J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:
3026.]. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:293559.

heart failure survival analysis. Stud Health Technol
Inform 2015;216:404.

6. Cook NR, Ridker P. Calibration of the pooled
cohort equations for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: an update. Ann Intern Med 2016;165:

15. Guidi G, Pettenati MC, Melillo P, Iadanza E.
A machine learning system to improve heart failure patient assistance. IEEE J Biomed Health

78694.

Inform 2014;18:17506.

7. Shah SJ, Katz DH, Selvaraj S, et al. Phenomapping for novel classication of heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction. Circulation 2015;131:
26979.

16. Ishwaran H, Kogalur UB, Blackstone EH,
Lauer MS. Random survival forests. Ann Appl Stat
2008;2:84160.

8. Berikol GB, Yildiz O, zcan IT. Diagnosis of
acute coronary syndrome with a support vector
machine. J Med Syst 2016;40:84.
9. Balasubramanian V, Gouripeddi R, Panchanathan S, Vermillion J, Bhaskaran A, Siegel R.
Support vector machine based conformal predictors for risk of complications following a coronary drug eluting stent procedure. 2009 36th
Annual Computers in Cardiology Conference
(CinC), Park City, UT; 2009:58.
10. Furey TS, Cristianini N, Duffy N, Bednarski DW,
Schummer M, Haussler D. Support vector machine
classication and validation of cancer tissue samples using microarray expression data. Bioinformatics 2000;16:90614.
11. Brown MP, Grundy WN, Lin D, et al. Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression data by using support vector machines. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:2627.
12. Wang Y, Simon MA, Bonde P, et al. Decision
tree for adjuvant right ventricular support in patients receiving a left ventricular assist device.
J Heart Lung Transplant 2012;31:1409.
13. Motwani M, Dey D, Berman DS, et al. Machine
learning for prediction of all-cause mortality in
patients with suspected coronary artery disease: a
5-year multicentre prospective registry analysis.
Eur Heart J 2017;38:5007.
14. Panahiazar M, Taslimitehrani V, Pereira N,
Pathak J. Using EHRs and machine learning for

17. Zolfaghar K, Meadem N, Teredesai A, Roy
SB, Chin SC, Muckian B. Big data solutions for
predicting risk-of-readmission for congestive
heart failure patients. 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data, Silicon Valley, CA;
2013:6471.
18. Miranda E, Irwansyah E, Amelga AY,
Maribondang MM, Salim M. Detection of cardiovascular disease risks level for adults using naive Bayes
classier. Healthc Inform Res 2016;22:196205.
19. Letian W, Han L, Zhang L, Guo S. GW27-e0397:
an analysis and diagnosis system of coronary heart
disease based on big data platform. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2016;68:C82.
20. Pal D, Mandana KM, Pal S, Sarkar D,
Chakraborty C. Fuzzy expert system approach
for coronary artery disease screening using
clinical parameters. Knowl-Based Syst 2012;36:
16274.
21. Borracci RA, Arribalzaga EB. Fuzzy logic-based
model to stratify cardiac surgery risk. Rev Argent
Cardiol 2015;83. Available at: http://ppct.caicyt.
gov.ar/index.php/rac/article/view/6730. Accessed
March 23, 2017.
22. Anuradha B, Reddy VCV. Cardiac arrhythmia
classication using fuzzy classiers. JATIT 2008;4:
3539.
23. Muthukaruppan S, Er MJ. A hybrid particle
swarm optimization based fuzzy expert system for
the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. Expert
Syst Appl 2012;39:1165765.

24. Arif M, Malagore IA, Afsar FA. Detection and
localization of myocardial infarction using Knearest neighbor classier. J Med Syst 2012;36:
27989.
25. Saini I, Singh D, Khosla A. QRS detection using
K-nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN) and evaluation on standard ECG databases. J Adv Res 2013;4:
33144.
26. Wang K, Kong Y. Diagnosis of heart disease
via CNNs (CS231n). Stanford University.
Available at: https://www.studocu.com/en-au/
document/stanford-university/convolutional-neuralnetworks-for-visual-recognition/practical/practicaldiagnosis-of-heart-disease-via-cnns/751944/
view?auth0&auth_prem0&new_title0&has_
ashcardstrue. Accessed March 26, 2017.
27. Karpathy A, Li FF. Deep visual-semantic
alignments for generating image descriptions.
CVPR 2015:312837.
28. Cho K, Van Merrinboer B, Gulcehre C, et al.
Learning phrase representations using RNN
encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation. arXiv 2014:1406.1078.
29. Choi E, Schuetz A, Stewart WF, Sun J. Using
recurrent neural network models for early detection of heart failure onset. J Am Med Inform Assoc
2017;24:36170.
30. Kannathal N, Acharya UR, Lim CM,
Sadasivan PK, Krishnan SM. Classication of cardiac patient states using articial neural networks.
Exp Clin Cardiol 2003;8:20611.
31. Sengupta PP, Huang YM, Bansal M, et al.
Cognitive machine-learning algorithm for cardiac
imaging: a pilot study for differentiating
constrictive pericarditis from restrictive cardiomyopathy.
e004330.

Circ

Cardiovasc

Imaging

2016;9:

KEY WORDS big data, cognitive
computing, deep learning, machine learning

