Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies (ICICCT 2018)
IEEE Xplore Compliant - Part Number: CFP18BAC-ART; ISBN:978-1-5386-1974-2

A Boosting Approach for Maternal Hypertensive
Disorder Detection
Neethu Mathew
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Jyothi Engineering College
Thrissur, India
neethumathew425@gmail.com
Abstract Pregnancy is the delicate stage in every womans
life cycle. The changes in the health during this period may lead
to risk in pregnancy. That is a high risk pregnancy is one that
endangers the womens or babys health or life. Hypertensive
disorders are the most common cause of these pregnancy related
complications. In the present era, its a major challenge in health
care because their results in increasing maternal and fetal death.
There exist various techniques widely used in data mining for the
early identification of health diseases. Better treatment can be
provided in the early stage by the early identification of
hypertensive disorders. The main intent of this paper is to
pinpoint the present complications of a pregnant woman by
applying a boosted random forest approach for predicting
hypertensive disorders. This classification method helps to
predict the risks, diagnose and thereby can decrease maternal
and fetal mortality, which remains as a large problem in much of
the developing nation.

Keywordsclassification; hypertensive disorder; data mining;
pregnancy

I.

INTRODUCTION

index, excessive protein in urine, gestational age, etc. Also
women face higher risk due to obesity, woman over the age 40
or under 20, multiple births, woman with diabetes and kidney
disease, etc. The maternal hypertensive disorders in pregnancy
can be classified into various classes like preeclampsiaeclampsia, gestational hypertension, chronic hypertension and
preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension.
Preeclampsia (PE) is a condition that pregnant women develop
with high blood pressure accompanied by proteinuria. This
condition generally appears after the twentieth week of
gestation. It may develop into the more severe state called
eclampsia. Development of high blood pressure in the second
half of pregnancy without proteinuria or other symptoms of
preeclampsia is Gestational hypertension (GH). A medical
complication developed before pregnancy or before the
gestation week 20 is called chronic hypertension. Women with
Chronic high blood pressure diagnosed before pregnancy
develops a rapid increase in excess protein in the urine or
blood pressure results in chronic hypertension with
superimposed preeclampsia. The effect of high blood pressure
in pregnancy varies based on these disorders and factors.

Pregnancy is an experience of motherhood, which
needs much more medical care and attention. Women who
were healthy and normal before getting pregnant may
experience some risk of problems with them. Hypertension
occurs when women have high blood pressure. Having
hypertension at any point can lead to health problems, but
especially during the cycle of gestation. It could have
dangerous outcomes for mother and child, if the adequate care
is not taken to control it effectively. The mortality rate in the
world has reduced. Women are still dying due to pregnancy
complications. Hypertension and its disorders are a leading
cause of concern and its prevalence is increasing in developing
countries. Therefore, getting identification at an early stage
and regular pregnancy care can help to decrease the risk for
problems before they become more serious.
There are wide varieties of factors that complicate
pregnancy. The maternal and fetal conditions include maternal
smoking, blood pressure, mean arterial pressure, body mass

Fig.1. Classification of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy

978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 2018 IEEE

1474

Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies (ICICCT 2018)
IEEE Xplore Compliant - Part Number: CFP18BAC-ART; ISBN:978-1-5386-1974-2

Data mining techniques helps for the extraction of
medical data and their analyzing. Its main aspect is pattern
discovery. Classification is a basic task in this field of
knowledge discovery in database. The classification in
medical diagnostic problem assigns a disease label to the
instance. Many researches are going on to find a long term
health effect of maternal hypertensive disorders. So it is
needed to develop an efficient and better method for
identifying, diagnosing and treating women at risk.
This paper is outlined as follows: section II focuses on
literature survey. Section III involves the proposed system
where the model is explained.
II.

hypertension using risk factors and the ID3 outperformed
C4.5.

III.

PROPOSED SYSTEM

In the proposed system we have put forward a novel
method for detecting the pregnancy disorders. Women with
maternal disorders have different changes in her body
compared to normal one and this creates threat to her and
infant life. In this model focus is on women suffering from
maternal hypertensive disorders. Data mining techniques are
widely employed to reach a decision or to classify or identify
the disorder.

LITERATURE SURVEY

This section survey about existing work which make
use of data mining methods for finding reliable information
about pregnant women having hypertensive diseases. Some of
these studies find solutions for healthcare limitations in
maternal care domain.
M. W. Moreira, J. J. Rodrigues, A. M. Oliveira and
K. Saleem [1] proposed an inference mechanism using data
mining technique based on two Bayes based classifiers. And
to classify the severity of disorder from its symptoms they
compare two Bayesian classifiers named Nave Bayes and
Averaged one-dependence estimators classifier (AODE).
M. W. Moreira, J. J. Rodrigues, A. M. Oliveira and K.
Saleem [2] proposed Nave Bayes classifier and its
performance is compared with a classifier called J48 classifier.
These two classifiers are good predictors for decision making
problems. Their result shows that the tree based classifier has
more accuracy than the Naive Bayes classifier.
A probabilistic knowledge based system called
Bayesian network has a significant role in healthcare.
Diagnosis of the pregnancy disorder preeclampsia [3] is done
using the Bayesian network. In this model they use network
nodes risk factors, physiological mechanisms and
symptoms/exams. And hypertension and proteinuria nodes
provide more contribution for decision making.
Severe maternal morbidity can be predicted early using
techniques like logistic regression [4], and they proposed tool
for the identification and classification of patients risk.
Hidden Markov models [5] based studies are also done to
classify the pregnancy disorders. They generated the
sequence of observation using the symbolic dynamics for
assessing cardiovascular control in hypertensive pregnancy
disorder.
In [6], the authors propose a random forest approach for
predicting the hypertensive disorders related to pregnancy.
They also present the modeling and performance assessment.
This tree based classifier shows a good performance and also
comparing this with other classifiers.
Development of a predictive model is used for the
classification of risk related to hypertension using decision
tree [7]. The model was formed by two decision tree based
algorithms.ID3 and C4.5 algorithms identified risk of

Fig 1: Proposed system architecture

A. Random Forest
The tree based classifier called random forest which
is a multitude of decision trees is mainly used for several types
of classification tasks. The prediction of several trees is

978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 2018 IEEE

1475

Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies (ICICCT 2018)
IEEE Xplore Compliant - Part Number: CFP18BAC-ART; ISBN:978-1-5386-1974-2

combined in it essentially. Random features and random
inputs produce good results in classification. When we use
random forest, a user has to determine only two parameters.
They are the number of trees to be used and the number of
variables to be randomly selected from the available set. Let
the assumed number of training cases or observations in the
training set is N. Then N observations are sampled at random,
but with replacement. If there are K total input variables, the
input variables which are used at random to find the decision
at a node of the tree k should be less than K. They create best
possible split to develop a decision tree model. Each tree is
grown to the largest extent possible.
The process of splitting is performed with the
measures like information gain or Gini index. The method of
splitting affects trees accuracy. It splits the node into two or
more sub nodes. The decision tree grows using a set of
samples. Its growth starts from the root node and divides
recursively by using splitting rules until it reach a stopping
condition. Each individual tree gives a classification, a
prediction. The leaves are outputting the prediction. Each of
the tree is made with a sample of the data in the average of
many decision trees. That is, once each of the trees is
classified, the value that has majority among them is taken as
the output.

In the proposed model we can apply a boosting
technique for the maternal disease detection. Its a method
used to boost single trees into strong learning algorithms.
Finally it combines the classifiers by letting them vote on a
final prediction. We can achieve accuracy by combining the
random features with method of boosting. Boosted trees try to
improve the model fit over different trees by considering past
fits. The classifiers focus on the cases which are incorrectly
classified in the last round.
Algorithm is as follows:
Input training sample S={X,C}
Where

are features and

2.

are the classes
Assign weight W for each features and initialize W=1/N

3.

Create subset

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

(1)

Where the sample set
is splitting at node n into
and .
And
are the sample sets at the left and right
child node. The splitting process is continued recursively until
the information gain is zero or until the stopping criteria .The
probability distribution is stored at the leaf node. If the
decision tree training is completed then we can estimate the
class label. The misclassification rate is expressed as error
rate. We compute the error rate of decision tree. Based on the
error calculation ER we calculate the weight W.

=

B. Boosted Random Forest

1.

When we introduce boosting algorithm into random
forest, decision tree weighting and updating weights are
considered. The training set weight is initialized into 1/N
where N is taken as the size of training set. It also follows the
same procedure of random forest in tree construction. The
splitting process can be done with information gain. The
information gain IG can be calculated as:

Where ER is the error rate of the decision tree and M
is the number of classes. If W > 0 the weight is updated,
otherwise the tree is rejected. When an input is given its
output is stored in the leaf nodes. That is, they produce the
classification result. Class with highest probability is chosen.
The hypertensive disorder class prediction will be the
weighted majority vote.
The main intent of boosted random forest is to
maintain the generality. The boosting method will help to
attain good classification performance. With regard to
standard input we are able to find individuals as having mild,
moderate and severe hypertension and can classify in the
correct disorder type.

IV.

from training sample S

For each feature in
calculate information gain IG
Find the best split and build the trees
Find the class label
Calculate the error rate of each decision tree
Compute weight based on error rate
Updating weights of decision trees
Do until stopping condition or reach a particular number
of decision trees and weighted decision trees.
11. Output the classifier.

(2)

CONCLUSION

Data mining methods are essential in the medical
field for prediction. The area of data mining has established
itself as the major part of computer science and contributes a
way to improve the decision making process. It has shown
significant potential for future improvements. In this proposed
work designing an approach called boosted random forest to
classify the hypertensive pregnancy disorder for the early
prediction. This work can bring a drastic change in medical
fields, especially in the maternal care domain by effectively
classifying the disorders. As future work we can improve the

978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 2018 IEEE

1476

Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies (ICICCT 2018)
IEEE Xplore Compliant - Part Number: CFP18BAC-ART; ISBN:978-1-5386-1974-2

performance and accuracy using other
techniques and expanding size of datasets.

classification

[12] Laura A. Magee, A. Pels, M. Helewa,E. Rey,P. von Dadelszen et
al.,Diagnosis,evaluation,and management of the hypertensive disorders
of pregnancy,Pregnancy Hypertension: An international Journal of
Womens Cardiovascular Health, vol.4, no. 2,pp. 105-145,2014

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude to all respected personalities who had guided,
inspired and helped me in the successful completion of this
paper. First and foremost, I express my thanks to The Lord
Almighty for guiding me in this endeavor and making it a
success.
REFERENCES

[1]

M. W. Moreira, J. J. Rodrigues, A. M. Oliveira, K. Saleem, An
inference mechanism using Bayes-based classifiers in pregnancy care,
2016 18th IEEE International Conference on, Munich, Germany, Sep.
14-17, 2016, pp. 15
[2] M. W. L. Moreira, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, A. M. B. Oliveira, K. Saleem,
Performance evaluation of predictive classifiers for pregnancy care, in
2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in
Communications: E-Health, Washington (DC), USA, Dec. 4-8, 2016,
pp. 15.
[3] M. W. Moreira, J. J. Rodrigues, A. M. Oliveira, R. F. Ramos, and K.
Saleem, A preeclampsia diagnosis approach using Bayesian networks,
in Communications (ICC), 2016 IEEE International Conference on,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, May 23-27, 2016, pp. 15
[4] Eugenia Arrieta Rodriguez1, Francisco Edna Estrada, William
Caicedo, and Juan Carlos Martinez Santos, Early Prediction of Severe
Maternal Morbidity Using Machine Learning Techniques, Advances in
Artificial Intelligence, pp 259-270,Springer, IBERAMIA 2016
[5] V. Baier, M. Baumert, P. Caminal, M. Vallverdu, R. Faber, and A.
Voss,Hidden markov models based on symbolic dynamics for
statistical modeling of cardiovascular control in hypertensive pregnancy
disorders,IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 140143, 2006.
[6] Mario W. L. Moreira Joel J. P. C. Rodrigues, Antonio M. B. Oliveira,
Kashif Saleem, and Augusto J. Venancio Neto,  Predicting
Hypertensive Disorders in High-risk Pregnancy Using the Random
Forest Approach ,2017 IEEE
[7] Idowu Peter Adebayo, Predictive model for the classification of
hypertension risk using decision tree algorithm,American Journal of
Mathematical and Computer Modelling, vol. 2,no. 2, 2017, pp.48-59.
[8] Cheng-Ding Chang , Chien-Chih Wang , Bernard C. Jiang Using data
mining techniques for multi-diseases prediction modeling of
hypertension and hyperlipidemia by common risk factors , ELSEVIER
, Expert Systems with Applications 38 (2011) 55075513
[9] Lakshmi.B.N, Dr.Indumathi.T.S, Dr.Nandini Ravi, A study on C.5
Decision Tree Classification Algorithm for Risk Predictions during
Pregnancy International Conference on Emerging Trends in
Engineering, Science and Technology ICETEST, Science Direct,
ELSEVIER,2015.
[10] P. Anastasopoulos, K. H. Nikolaides, C. N. Schizas, and K. C.
Neokleous, Neural networks to estimate the risk for preeclampsia
occurrence, in 2009 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks, Atlanta (GA), USA, Jun. 14-19, 2009, pp. 22212225.
[11] Yohei Mishina,Masamitsu Tsuchiya and Hironobu Fujiyoshi,Boosted
random forest,International conference on computer vision theory and
applications,VISAPP,2014

978-1-5386-1974-2/18/$31.00 2018 IEEE

1477

