Proceedings of the 25 Annual Intematianal Conference of the IEEE EMBS
Cancun, Mexico. September 17-21,2003

Development of an Evidence-Based Ethical Decision-Making Tool for
Neonatal Intensive Care Medicine
Monique F~ize,~,
Robin C. Wake?, Colleen M. Ennett
Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
2School of Information Technology and Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
3Childrens Hospital ofEastem Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada
The goal of this research project is to combine
our intelligent decision-aid systems with a patient decisionsupport tool to provide more information to physicians, nurses
and parents when they are facing very difficult, ethical
decisions regarding the care or management of neonatal
intensive care (NICU)patients. Our two artificial intelligence
approaches, one using case-based reasoning and the other
artificial neural networks, may provide critical information
such as estimates of the likelihood of survival and the use and
duration of artificial ventilation. These estimates, in addition to
other factors such as birth weight, gestational age and the
presence of major complications, may provide eritical
information to health care givers and parents to decide
whether to initiate intensive care for the infant, or whether to
terminate it if it has already been initiated.
Abstract-

Keywords-Ethics,

neonatal medicine, decision-aid system

1. INTRODUCTION

Neonatal medicine has been available for over 30
years in the developed world and has been providing
specialized and intensive care to premature babies and
critically ill newboms to improve their health and survival
[l]. Larcher and Hird [2] define intensive care as the use of
invasive treatment intended to save or extend the life of a
neonate who might otherwise die from organ failure. It
includes artificial ventilation, other forms of organ support
and artificial nutrition delivered by invasive means. They
add that this type of care must be delivered by a specialized
team.
Since the early days, great progress has been seen in the
capabilities of neonatal intensive care units (NICU) in terms
of the sophistication of the equipment that allows more
rapid and precise diagnosis, effective monitoring, and
specific therapy [I]. A new specialization has also arisen:
The neonatologist. The impact of these intensive care
services has been mixed. There has been a substantial
reduction of mortality in premature infants ... the rate of
handicap or significant morbidity appears to have remained
steady or declined in survivors of NICU of nearly all
gestational ages and weights [I]. However, the author also
states that the rate of prematurity, low birth weights, and the
rate of birth defects has not declined in the US since the
appearance of NICUs [ 11. On the question of birth defects, a
report states that 3 or 4 babies out of 100 are bom with some
type of birth defect in the US [3].

0-7803-7789-3/03/$17.00Q2003 IEEE

A serious concem far health care givers and for parents
remains: To whom should this intensive care be
administered and in what circumstances should it be
withdrawn? In a recent article, Tyson [4] stated: Despite
the success of newborn intensive care, a vexing ethical
question remains: Which pre-term infants are so malformed,
sick, or immature that newbom intensive care should not be
administered? This sta1.ement has lead several researchers
to ponder upon ways in which this question can be
answered. Are there factors relating these babies health
status that can guide physicians and parents to make the
decision either not to begin treatment or to end it if it has
been started?
The term extremely low birth weight infants is used to
refer to infants who weigh 1000 grams or less; infants who,
if they survive, usually need a respirator for more than a
month and remain in hospital for more than 100 days [4].
Gestational age is another factor that could be considered in
these cases and a recommendation is to begin intensive care
for infants 25 weeks gestational age or greater and not for
infants of 22 weeks or less [5]; for infants of 23-24 weeks,
treatment should be decided with the parents [4,6]. Of
course these decisions also depend on whether the infants
condition deteriorates or if a serious complication exists
such as a large intracranial hemorrhage. Among infants of
the same birth weight, those with the most advanced
gestational age are the most mature, least likely to die, and
thus, most likely to benefit from neonatal intensive care
~41.
European countries appear to be much less aggressive
than the US in using neonatal intensive care and place more
emphasis on prenatal care. Tyson [4] states that in Denmark,
for example, neonatal intensive care is not recommended for
infants below 25 or 26 weeks of gestational age and in
Sweden for infants under 600 grams. In developing
countries, if available, it would not be provided for infants
weighing less than 1000 grams. Tyson admits that there is
little information documenting actual practice in
administration of this type of care in the US. h Canada,
management of the wom,an with threatened birth of an infant
of extremely low gestational age is guided by a joint
statement from the following national organizations and
their committees: The Fetus and Newbom Committee of the
Canadian Paediatric Society (CPS) and the Matemal-Fetal
Medicine Committee of the Society of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists of Canada [7]. This guideline was published
in 1994; however, similar to the US situation, there is little
data in Canada on actual practices regarding this issue.

1260

(3392 complete patient cases) and the remaining data used
in the test set (1696 cases). The hyperbolic tangent transfer
function was used.
Table 1 shows the performance of our ANNs with
respect to measuring sensitivity, specificity, classification
rate (CR), and it is also useful to compare the CR with the
constant predictor (CP), which is a statistical benchmark
where all cases are classified as belonging to the class with
the highest a priori probability. As can be observed in
Table 1, the CR is systematically higher than the CP, and
substantially higher for predicting long-term stay in the
NICU.

Larcher and Hird [Z]mention that some guidelines exist
for the withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment and that such
guidance can be helpful, but it does not abolish controversy
and ambiguity. These authors also say that: Clinicians
require guidance that is practical, reasonably specific, but
not prescriptive ... and that it is ethically acceptable to offer
intensive care until a clearer view of the babys prognosis
and the wishes of the parents can be defined.
The discussions above indicate a critical need to provide
physicians with more accurate estimations of the likelihood
of the infant surviving, the estimated duration of artificial
ventilation, and length of stay in the NICU (LOS) , If these
estimates could be provided with acceptable accuracy, in
addition to the factors mentioned above regarding birth
weight, gestational age and the presence of major
complications, then guidelines could be developed to
enhance the decision-making on whether to provide neonatal
care to an infant or not, or to withdraw it when the
circumstances warrant this decision.

TABLE I

=Ohrs

11. PROPOSED APPROACHES

Our research group has designed two complementary
artificial intelligence approaches to estimate outcomes for
NICU patients. First, a casebased reasoner (CBR) mtches
a new patient anival in the NlCU to the most similar
patients from a large database of patients from the Canadian
Neonatal Networks NICU database with the input variables
from SNAP-I1 (Score for Neonatal Acute Physiology,
Version 2: lowest blood pressure, lowest temperature,
lowest p02ifi02 ratio, lowest serum pH, presence of
seizures and lowest urine output - all parameters measured
within first 12 hours of admission) and SNAPPE.11 (SNAP
with Perinatal Extension - plus birth weight, small for
gestational age (SGA) status and Apgar score at 5 minutes)
[8]. The SNAP-I1 variables are a subset (found via logistic
regression) of the original SNAP Score that contained 37
inputs [9]. This database also includes admission and
demographic data, the SNAP illness of severity score,
specified diagnosis, complications, procedures and
therapies, discharge information and summary data on
staffing and nursing acuity.
The CBR can display outcomes, complications, and
medical information of the matched patients that may guide
physicians in their diagnosis or in their selection of therapies
for the newly admitted infant. The system is designed to be
user-friendly and the outputs mimic the process physicians
use in decision-making so that their use is intuitive. [IO]
Our second approach uses artificial neural networks
(ANNs) to estimate the following outcomes for the single
newly admitted patient to the NICU: mortality (survival or
death), the need and duration of artificial ventilation, and
length of stay in the NICU [II-131. The design used a twolayer (input and output layer) feedforward ANN trained
using the back-propagation algorithm, without weightelimination, with 213 of the data used in the training set

Sens (%)
26.6
21.8
Spec (%)
98.0
95.3
CR (A)
91.3
82.1
Constant
90.0
81.0
predictor ( O h )
Survival rate
Vent=Duration of ventilation (hours)
LOS=Length of stay (days)

>=24hr
24.4
97.1
89.4
88.0

<=ld
23.1
94.3
76.2
73.0

>28d
76.9
17.5
11.2

60.0

Ill. DISCUSSION

The two artificial intelligence tools described above
provide information that add to the known admission data
such as gestational age, birth weight, and apparent defects.
The tools provide an estimation of mortality, whether the
infant will be on a respirator for a very long period of time
(Tyson states a month as indicative of major problems) and
/or stay in the hospital for a long period (Tyson mentions
100 days for this variable). Being able to predict these
outcomes may help in the decision-making process for
admission to a NICU and whether the infant is likely to
benefit from intensive care or not [4]. Gestational age, birth
weight, estimating mortality, artificial ventilation, length of
stay were all variables mentioned in the literature that can
aid clinical decision-making in the NICU. However, it is
certain that the decision-support systems would increase
their usefulness if they could also predict other rare
outcomes, those that would better guide physicians and
parents in their decision-making process in the NICU. Some
of the outcomes that should be added to our systems are:
Intraventricular
hemorrhage
(IVH),
perivenhicular
leukomalacia (PVL), broncho-pulmonary dysplasia (BPD),
necrotising entero-colitis (NEC), and retinopathy of
prematurity (ROP). In cases where the greatest uncertainty
remains, care could be initiated, and estimations could be
provided at regular intervals to re-assess the situation on
prognosis and outcomes.
Our work to date has shown the usefulness of
ANNs for estimating the outcomes listed in Table I . A

1261

major barrier in previous w o k that discouraged many
researchers from using neural networks was their image as
black boxes. ANNs use complex algorithms for
calculating the weights on each input and node. Our research
group has performed several modifications to our ANNs to
render them more useful and effective. For example, we
extract the weights of the inputs and hidden nodes to assess
the importance of each variable with respect to the outcome;
we re-sample from the rare outcome when the sample is
very small in order to increase the sensitivity of the
estimations; we have automated the adjustment of the nine
parameters that determine optimal performance; we use a
new stopping criterion (log-sensitivity index) which
optimizes the values of specificity and sensitivity [14-181.
These advances have substantially contributed to increasing
the performance and effectiveness of our ANNs.
The next step to improve our systems would consist in
adding the rare outcomes previously listed that would be
relevant to the decision-making process of administering or
withdrawing neonatal intensive care. In order to achieve the
goal of estimating these additional rare outcomes, we have
developed and tested a method to replace missing values in
our NICU database. Using only complete records restricts
greatly the number of cases containing these rare outcomes
and so extending the case number to our entire database of
over 20,000 NICU patient cases will now allow us to train
and test our ANNs to predict these additional outcomes [ 191.
Until this step has been completed, we plan to use the
results from the Canadian Neonatal Network whose SNAPI1 score is a predictor of IVH (intraventricular hemorrhage)
and CLD (chronic lung disease) in neonatal intensive care
patients. In their article, Chien et al. report the percent
Contribution to predictive power of various factors to predict
1VH:as follows: Gestational age is 41 %; SNAP-I1 is 30 %;
outborn status is 23 %; and Apgar at 5 minutes is 6 %. For
predicting CLD, the percent contribution to predictive
power ae: 54 % for gestional age; 30 % for SNAP-II; 9 %
for small for gestional age; 2 % for the 5-minute Apgar and
2 % for outbom status; it is 3 % for a male infant [20].
Our research group is currently designing an expert
system that will incorporate the predictive tool (ANNs for
each outcome of interest), then merge this information for a
global view of the situation in a manner in which physicians
wish to see it. The information will then be transferred in a
manner that parents can understand (both in terms of
language, content, and the speed at which this information is
provided to them. The generic tool will be adapted to
various situations and ensure that parents are included in the
decision-making process and are able to reach a consensus
with the physicians, without coercion. The decision-support
tool will be sttited to the parents needs, values, and level of
information that can be communicated effectively to them.
Dr. OConnors generic tool (at University of Ottawa) that
supports patient-centered decision-making will be the base
on which this prototype is constructed [21,22]. A short pilot
clinical test in the NICU will follow the final design. The

work is being carried-out with frequent consultation with the
NICU physicians at CHEO (Childrens Hospital of Eastern
Ontario). The final step will be a longer trial in several of
the Canadian Neonatal Network NICUs in various parts of
Canada.
V. CONCLUSION
Our research to dzte has led to the development of
prototypes that will allow physicians to better predict certain
outcomes in neonatal intensive care and thus use this
information when they counsel families on prognosis and
the desirability of initiating or on withdrawing treatment
when conditions dictate this approach. It will be very
important in our future work to include parents in the
decision loop. An expert system is in initial stages of
development to complement the predictive tools described
above. This system will take into consideration the parents
values and manner and tempo in which the information
should be provided to tham.

1262

IGFERENCES

[ I ] B.S. Carter, Ethical issues in neonatal care, E
Mediche [online journal], EMedicine.com, 2003.
Available:
httn:llr~~vu~.eniedicinc.~i~nilnc~~t~nic2767.lit1n
[2] V. Larcher, and M. F. Hird, Withholding and
withdrawing neonatal intensive care, Current
Paediahics 2002;12:470-475.
[3] Overview of birth defects, [Online] Childrens
Hospital of tht: Kings Daughters Health System
2003.AvaiIable:

www.chkd.org/lligh-risk-newbomibdefects.asp
[4] I. Tyson, Evidence-based ethics and the care of
premature infants, [Online] The Future of
Children, a publication of The David and Lucile
Packard Foundation 2003. Available:
www.futureofchildreii.ordinfomlation2826Iinf~rni
ation show.htm?doc id=79897
[5] M. C. Allen, P. K. Donohue, and A. E. Dusman,
The limit of viability - Neonatal outcome of
infants born at 22 to 25 weeks gestation, New
EnglandJ m I #ofMedkine1993;329:1597-I60I.
161 M. Hack and A. A. Fanaroff, Outcomes of
extremely immature infants - A perinatal
of Medicine
dilemma, N?w England J.
1993;329 1679-1650.
[7] Fetus and Newborn Committee (Canadian
Paediatric Society), Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Committee (:Society of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists of Canada), Management of the
woman with !threatened birth of an infant of
extremely low gestational age, Ci M&d
Association Jowal, 1994;151(5):547-551;553.

[8] D. K. Richardson, J. D. Corcoran, G.J. Escobar,
and S. K. Lee, SNAP-I1 and SNAPPBII:
Simplified newbom illness severity and mortality
risk scores, JP&S, 2001;138:92-100.
[9] D. K. Richardson, J. E. Gray, M. C. McCormick,
K. Workmann, and D. A. Goldmann, Score for
neonatal acute physiology: a physiologic severity
 index for neonatal intensive care, Ped-,
1993
Mar;91(3):617-623.
[IO] M. Frize and R. Walker. Clinical decision-support
systems for intensive care units using casehased
reasoning. Med Eng & P W . 2001; 22671677.
[ I l l Y. Tong, M. Frize, and R. Walker, Estimating
ventilation using artificial neural networks in
intensive care units, Pmc BMESBMBS CO&
1999.
[I21 C. R. Walker, C. M. Ennett, and M. Frize, Use of
an artificial neural network to estimate probability
of mortality and duration of ventilation in neonatal
intensive care unit patients, Medinfo, 2001.
[13]Y. Tong, M. Frize, and R. Walker, Extending
ventilation duration estimations approach from
adult to neonatal intensive care patients using
artificial neural networks, IEEE Trans Info
T e c h n o l B w d 2002 Jun;6(2):188-191.
[I41 M. Frize, C. M. Ennett, M. Stevenson, and H. C. E.
Trigg, Clinical decision-support systems for
intensive care units using artificial neural
networks, MedEng Phys 2001;23(3):217-225.
[I51 C. M. Ennett and M. Frize, Weight-elimination
neural networks applied to coronary surgery
mortality prediction, IEEE Trans Info Techno1
Bwmed[In press].
[16]M. Frize and C. M. Ennett, Improving the
potential clinical significance of decis ion-support
systems using artificial neural networks, Pmc
AM7A 5)wp 2Mx):IOll.
[I71 C.M. Ennett, M Frize, N Scales (2003) Evaluation
of the Logarithmic-Sensitivity Index as a Neural
Network Stopping Criterion for Rare Outcomes.
Proc. ITAB, Birmingham, April.
[I81 M. Frize, CM Ennett and E. Charette E. (ZOOO),
Automated Optimization of the Performance of
Artificial Neural Networks to Estimate Medical
outcomes. Submitted to the 3rdlTAB conference
(Infoormation Technoloo Applications in
Biomedicine) and l77S (Internarional Telemedid
Infoormation Societyl, Washington, November.
[19]C. M. Ennett, M. Frize, and C. R. Walker,
Influence of missing values on artificial neural
networks
performance,
Medinfo 2001;10(Pt
1):449-53.
[ZO]L.Y. Chien, R. Whyte, P. Thiessen, R. Walker, D.
Brabyn, S.K. Lee SNAP-II Predicts Severe
Intraventricular Hemorrhage and Chronic Lung

1263

Disease In the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. J of
Perimmlogy, 2002; 2 2 26-30.
[21]A.M. OConnor, E.R. Drake, V. Fiset, I. Graham,
A. Laupacis, P. Tugwell. The Ottawa Patient
Decision Aids. Efecfzie Clinical W c e . 1999;
2(4): 163-170.(www.acoonlinc.orp/iournals!ec)
[22]A. OConnor, A. Rostrom, V. Fiset, J. Tetroe, V.
Entwistle, H. Llewellyn-Thomas, M. Barry, J.
Jones. Decision Aids for patients facing health
treatment or screening decisions. B&h Medical
Jmmal. 1999; 319:731-734.

