See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314284545

Predictive Model for the Classication of Hypertension Risk Using Decision
Trees Algorithm
Article  February 2017
DOI: 10.11648/j.ajmcm.20170202.12

CITATIONS

READS

11

3,172

1 author:
Peter Adebayo Idowu
Obafemi Awolowo University
102 PUBLICATIONS 439 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Disease Modelling View project

Model for predicting the risk of Kidney stone using data mining techniques View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Peter Adebayo Idowu on 02 May 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling
2017; 2(2): 48-59
http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/j/ajmcm
doi: 10.11648/j.ajmcm.20170202.12

Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension
Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm
Idowu Peter Adebayo
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria

Email address:
paidowu@oauife.edu.ng

To cite this article:
Idowu Peter Adebayo. Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm. American Journal of
Mathematical and Computer Modelling. Vol. 2, No. 2, 2017, pp. 48-59. doi: 10.11648/j.ajmcm.20170202.12
Received: December 8, 2016; Accepted: December 19, 2016; Published: February 24, 2017

Abstract: This study is focused with the development of a predictive model for the classification of the risk of hypertension
among Nigerians using decision trees algorithms based on historical information elicited about the risk of hypertension among
selected respondents in southwestern Nigeria. Following the identification of the risk factors of hypertension from experienced
cardiologists, structured questionnaires were used to collect information about the risk factors and the associated risk of
hypertension from selected respondents. The predictive model was formulated using two (2) decision trees algorithms, namely:
C4.5 and ID3 based on the information collected. The predictive model was simulated using the Waikato Environment for
Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) using the 10-fold cross validation technique for model training and testing. The results revealed
that the decision trees algorithms selected some risk factors among those identified as most predictive for the risk of
hypertension based on the information inferred from the dataset collected. The variables were used by the decision trees
algorithm to deduce the decision trees that were used to infer the risk of hypertension based on the values of the identified risk
factors. The ID3 with an accuracy of 100% outperformed the C4.5 which showed an accuracy of 86.36%. The variables
identified by the algorithms can help assist cardiologists concentrate on a smaller yet important set of risk factors for
identifying the risk of hypertension using rules derived from the path along the decision trees based on the value of the risk
factors of the individual.

Keywords: Hypertension Risk Factors, ID3, C4.5, Prediction, Classification, Decision Trees

1. Introduction
Data mining is a process of discovering meaningful useful
information in large data repositories. Data mining can
discover valuable but hidden knowledge from databases
especially those used in storing health-related information
about diseases affecting patients [1]. Clinical decisions are
often made based on doctors intuition and experience rather
than on the knowledge rich data hidden in the database. This
practice leads to unwanted biases, errors and excessive
medical costs which affects the quality of service provided to
patients [2]. The integration of clinical decision support with
computer based patient records could reduce medical errors,
enhance patient safety, decrease unwanted practice variation,
and improve patient outcome [3]. This suggestion is
promising as data modeling and analysis tools like data
mining have the potential to generate a knowledge-rich
environment which can help to significantly improve the

quality of clinical decisions. Predictive research aims at
predicting future events or an outcome based on patterns
within a set of variables and has become increasingly popular
in medical research [4] [5]. Accurate predictive models can
inform patients and physicians about the future course of an
illness or the risk of developing illness and thereby help
guide decisions on screening and/or treatment [6].
Hypertension, or high blood pressure, is dangerous
because it can lead to strokes, heart attacks, heart failure, or
kidney disease and many more disease ailments [7]. It occurs
when the persons mean arterial pressure is greater than the
upper range of accepted normal pressure. According to [8], a
mean arterial pressure of 110mmHg is considered
hypertensive. This level of mean pressure occurs when the
diastolic blood pressure is greater than 80mmHg
(120/80mmHg) and the systolic pressure is greater than
120mmHg. Many cardiologists consider systolic pressure of
160mmHg and diastolic pressure of 100mmHg
(160/100mmHg) to be hypertensive [9]. Several community

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2017; 2(2): 48-59

surveys indicate that the prevalence of hypertension in
Nigeria has increased from 11.2% in the 1990s to 27.9% in
2010 within the Niger Delta [10] and 22.6% in 2009 among a
suburban Christian community in south-west Nigeria. NCDs
are also currently responsible for at least 20% of all deaths in
Nigeria [11] and constitute up to 60% of the patients
admitted into the medical wards of most tertiary hospitals in
Nigeria [12]. The poor treatment outcome for noncommunicable diseases is however recognized globally, and
has prompted the WHO to propose a paradigm shift in health
care delivery, in favor of preventive and more proactive
healthcare [3] [13]. About 45 years ago, Omran had in a
series of articles proposing the epidemiological transition
theory [14]. In this theory, he predicted the displacement of
infectious diseases by NCD, as major causes of morbidity
and mortality, as a community or country develops. This
theory has since been confirmed in most countries of the
world, including Nigeria [13], [10], [12].
Uncontrolled hypertension is associated with serious endorgan damage such as heart disease, stroke, renal disease and
blindness [15], [16], [17]. These serious complications can be
prevented by adequate blood pressure control [18], [19]. The
prevention and control of hypertension has not received due
attention in many developing countries although it is one of
the most modifiable risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Reliable epidemiologic data are useful for the design and
implementation of effective strategies for the prevention and
control of hypertension. The associated risk factors of
hypertension include genetic or strong family history and
other factors which include increasing age, obesity,
smoking/use of tobacco, diabetes mellitus, dietary
consumption of high salt content and saturated fat, sedentary
lifestyle, stressful life, poor sleep and pregnancy [20], [21].
Among an eastern Nigeria population, alcohol consumption
rate among adults was observed to be as high as 55.8% [22].
Symptoms of hypertension observed include headaches
(20.3%), palpitations (12.4%), chest pain (7.1%), blurred
vision (7.1%), breathlessness, dizzy spells, tinnitus, vertigo
and insomnia [23]. Also, many patients only become aware
of their hypertensive status after the development of target
organ damage like stroke, hypertensive retinopathy, ischemic
heart disease, congestive heart failure, peripheral vascular
disease or chronic kidney disease [24]. Management of
hypertension involves conducting necessary investigations
and treatment. As Nigeria strives to become one of the
twenty leading economies by 2020, there is urgent need to
develop and implement control strategies to curb this health
menace that is claiming the lives of millions Nigerians on
yearly basis. As reported by two prominent National dailies
in the country, more than 20 million cases of hypertension
were estimated in 2010, affecting one in three men and one in
four women and the figure is expected to rise to 39 million
cases by 2030 [25].
Despite the differences and clashes in approaches, the
health sector has more need for data mining today. There are
several arguments that could be advanced to support the use
of data mining in the health sector, covering not just concerns

49

of public health but also the private health sector. There is a
wealth of knowledge to be gained from computerized health
records. Yet the overwhelming bulk of data stored in these
databases makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for
humans to sift through it and discover knowledge [26]. In
fact, some experts believe that medical breakthroughs have
slowed down, attributing this to the prohibitive scale and
complexity of present-day medical information. Computers
and data mining are best-suited for this purpose [27]. When
medical institutions apply data mining on their existing data,
they can discover new, useful and potentially life-saving
knowledge that otherwise would have remained inert in their
databases, such safety issues could be flagged and addressed
by hospital management and government regulators. Cao et
al [28] described the use of data mining as a tool to aid in
monitoring trends in the clinical trials of cancer vaccines. By
using data mining and visualization, medical experts could
find patterns and anomalies better than just looking at a set of
tabulated data. Health experts have also begun to look at how
to apply data mining for early detection and management of
pandemics.
Hypertension cases are continuously on the increase in
Nigeria and the number of hospital admissions and related
mortality and morbidity of hypertension in also on a steady
increase. Hypertension is constantly becoming a serious issue
and sending many young Nigerian men and women to their
grave. Unfortunately, majority of Nigerians do not realize the
presence of hypertension unless an associated cardiovascular
disease in most case is observed. Presently, there is not
preventive mechanism that is aimed at avoiding or at least
reducing the onset of hypertension or its related diseases.
There is a need for a model that will capture details relevant
to the assessment of the risk of hypertension so as to reduce
the untimely deaths associated with hypertension prevalence
in Nigeria; which is the focus of this paper to use decision
trees algorithm to identify variables important for predicting
the risk of hypertension and use them to develop a predictive
model for the risk of hypertension in non-hypertensive
patients. Nigeria has one of the highest burden of prevalence
of hypertension in Sub-Sahara Africa and the largest
percentage of these are due to the exposure to the risk factors
of high blood pressure such as age, obesity, sex and lifestyle
habits like high salt in-take, smoking, lack of physical
activity, alcohol and stress. Data mining techniques can help
identify relationships and activities that were not observed by
medical health experts needed in improving the decision
affecting the early detection of hypertension thereby reducing
the associated deaths. Early detection of the risk of
hypertension will help provide potential individuals of
alternative pattern to lifestyle and dietary needs so as to avert
the onset of hypertension and/or its related cardiovascular
diseases.

2. Related Works
A number of related works have been done in the area of
the application of data mining techniques to elicit knowledge

50

Idowu Peter Adebayo: Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm

from health-related data regarding the risk of diseases
especially in the area of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). A
number of such papers are summarized in the following
paragraphs.
Mayilvaganan and Rajeswari [29] proposed a human blood
pressure classification analysis model using fuzzy logic
control system. The model used a number of factors that
were identified as required in monitoring the blood pressure
for the purpose of early detection of slight increase in blood
pressure. The model was implemented using fuzzy
membership functions but the model was not validated using
live datasets. This is a limitation to the work as a live dataset
used in validating the model would have provided a better
understanding of the models performance upon deployment.
The models strength lie in the use of rules elicited from
expert cardiologist which although may be subjective based
on individual experiences.
Waghmare [30] worked on the prediction of the occurrence
of non-communicable diseases (NCD) depending on lifestyle
habits using data mining techniques. The datasets of 303
employees working in a public company in Mumbai, India
from 2009 to 2011 was used to develop the model. The kmeans clustering algorithm was used to develop the model
for predicting the risk of developing NCDs using information
about lifestyle habits. Diabetes, hypertension and
dyslipidaemia were the NCDs considered in the study while
the risk factors considered were limited to lifestyle habits
whereas other risk factors exist which are liable to improve
the performance of the prediction model
Ephzibah [8] proposed a fuzzy and genetic hybrid
algorithm model for the prediction of diabetes. This work
was applied to minimize cost and maximize accuracy. With
the help of genetic algorithm, the computation cost decreases
and the classification performance increases. It shows that by
applying this principle within a fuzzy logic framework can
significantly improve the mechanisms performance to

diagnose patients having diabetes. The classification
accuracies of these datasets were obtained by k-fold Crossvalidation. It achieves accuracy values of 84.24%.
Duen-Yian et al. [16] developed a predictive model for
cerebrovascular disease using data mining using 493 valid
samples and contains 29 attributes which includes blood test,
physical exam results and diagnosis results. It adopted three
classification algorithms, decision tree, and Bayesian
classifier and back propagation neural network, to construct
classification models. After applying the classification rules
decision tree showed 99.59% accuracy and constructed a
classification model with stable classification efficiency. The
result indicated that the decision tree is the best classification
algorithm when compared with other algorithms.

3. Materials and Methods
Figure 1 shows a description of the process involved in the
methodology design of this study used in the development of
the predictive model for hypertension. Following the review
of related works of literature in the body of knowledge of
hypertension and the factors related to its risk, a number of
variables (risk factors) were identified. The identified risk
factors of hypertension were validated by an expert
cardiologist with more than 20 years experience in medical
practice before the instrument of data collection was
constructed alongside the identification of respondents. The
selected data collection instrument for this study is the
questionnaire due to the problem associated with the
unavailability of data related to risk of hypertension but for
those with the disease. The questionnaire was constructed
with the purpose of acquiring information about the
associated risk of hypertension identified by the expert
cardiologist from individuals with no hypertension history
and from those with disease associated with the risk of
hypertension like: diabetes, renal diseases etc.

Figure 1. Research Design of the Study.

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2017; 2(2): 48-59

a Data identification and collection
The constructed questionnaire consisted of three (3)
sections, namely sections A, B and C. Section A of the
questionnaire consisted of information relevant to the
individuals demographic information, namely: sex, age,
education, occupation, marital status, job position, area of
residence and ethnicity. Section B of the questionnaire
consisted of information relating to the risk factors of the risk
hypertension from the individual respondent. The
information required includes: family history, body mass
index (BMI), frequency of exercise, marital/domestic issues,
stress in office, hours sent at work, smoking and length,
alcohol consumption, brand and duration and salt intake.
Section C consists of the doctors comments; this space is left
free for the doctor to provide his comment on the associated
risk of hypertension based on the information provided on
each questionnaire. It is important to state that the comments
provided by the cardiologist is subjective to his own
experience in medical practice and may not be a true
representation of the generic risk of hypertension in Nigeria.
b Formulation of Predictive Model
Following the identification and validation of variables
relevant to the risk of hypertension and the collection of
historical explaining the relationship between the identified
risk factors and their respective risk for each record of
individuals, the predictive model for the risk of hypertension
was formulated using the decision trees algorithm. In this
study, supervised machine learning algorithms was used in
formulating the predictive model since the pattern explaining
the relationship between the identified factors (input
variables) and the respective risk of hypertension (the target
variable) was required. The identified pattern can then be
converted into a set of rules that can help assist cardiologist
make informed decisions about the risk of hypertension in
Nigerians. For any supervised machine learning algorithm
proposed for the formulation of a predictive model, a
mapping function can be used to easily express the general
expression for the formulation of the predictive model for the
risk of hypertension  this is as a result that most machine
learning algorithms are black-box models which use
evaluators and not power series/polynomial equations.
The historical dataset S which consists of the records of
individuals containing fields representing the set of risk
factors (i number of input variables for j individuals),
alongside the respective target variable (risk of hypertension)
represented by the variable  the risk of hypertension for
the jth individual in the j records of data collected from the
hospital selected for the study. Equation 1 shows the mapping
function that describes the relationship between the risk
factors and the target class  risk of hypertension.
:



:

;

(1)
=

The mapping was used to represent the predictive model
for hypertension risk maps the risk factors of each individual

51

to their respective risk of hypertension according to equation 2.
=



(2)

c Decision trees (DT) algorithm used
The formulation of the predictive model for hypertension
risk in individuals was proposed using decision trees
algorithm for the classification of the risk of hypertension as
either of low, moderate and high risk given the values/labels
of the identified risk factors (nodes) used in the development
of a hierarchical tree structure using a splitting criteria. Each
interior node (starting from the root/parent node) of the
decision tree represents the attributes (important risk factors
of hypertension risk) with edges that correspond to the
values/labels of each attributes leading to a child node
(another attribute conditional to the value of the parent node)
at the bottom; this process continues for each subsequent
values of the attributes until the leaf is reached - the terminal
node also representing the target class (risk of hypertension 
low, moderate or high).
During the training process of model development using
the historical dataset collected, the pattern is learned by the
tree by splitting the training dataset into subsets based on an
attribute value test for each input variables; the process is
repeated on each derived subset in a recursive manner called
recursive partitioning. The recursion is completed when the
subset at a node has all the same value of the target class, or
when splitting no longer adds value to the predictions. This is
also called the Top-down induction of trees which is an
example of the greedy algorithm also called divide-andconquer.
The training data set, S is a set containing , " , . . . . , of
already classified samples of the records of individuals
consisting of the values of their risk factors,
=
{ , " , . . . . , } alongside the risk of hypertension, =
{% , &
,  } such that,
= ,
for all
individuals from 1 to j. The decision trees algorithms used to
develop the predictive model for the risk of hypertension in
individuals alongside their respective criteria are presented as
follows:
ID3 (Iterative Dichotomiser) decision trees algorithm
ID3 builds the DT from a set of training dataset, S by
making it the root node. For each iteration of the algorithm,
ID3 iterates through every unused attribute, X (risk factor) of
the set S and calculates the entropy, H(S) (or information
gain, IG(X)) of that attribute (risk factor). It then selected the
attribute which has the smallest entropy (or largest IG) value.
The set, S was then spitted by the selected attribute into
labels (e.g. present age is below 20, between 21 and 30,
between 31 and 40, above 40) to produce subsets of the data.
The algorithm then continued to recourse on each subset,
considering only attributes never used before. Throughout the
ID3 algorithm, the DT is constructed with each non-terminal
node representing the selected attribute (risk factor) on which
the data was split and the terminal nodes represented the

52

Idowu Peter Adebayo: Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm

class label (risk of hypertension) of the final subset of the
branch. Equations (3) and (4) show the two (2) metrics used
by the id3 DT algorithm in constructing the DT for
hypertension risk in pregnant women.
Entropy H(S) is a measure of the amount of uncertainty in
the data S while the information gain IG(X) is the measure of
the difference in entropy from before and after the dataset S
was split on an attribute X using a subset of labels T.
4

(

&

)*,

=  13 ) - log " ) -

5

45

 67 )

=

(3)
(4)

C4.5 decision trees algorithm
C4.5 algorithm builds DT from a set of training dataset, S
the same way as ID3, using the information entropy. At each
node of the tree, C4.5 chose the attribute (risk factor) of the
training data that most effectively splits its set of samples
into subsets enriched in one class or the other (risk of
hypertension). The splitting criteria used is then normalized
information gain (difference in entropy). The attribute with
the highest normalized information gain is chosen to make
the decision. Then C4.5 recurs on the smaller sub-list of
attributes. The C4.5 algorithm has a few base cases:
a All the samples in the list belong to the same class.
When this happens, it simply creates a leaf node for the
decision tree saying to choose that class.
b None of the features provide any information gain. In
this case, C4.5 creates a decision node higher up the
tree using the expected value of the class.
c Instance of previously-unseen class encountered. Again,
C4.5 creates a decision node higher up the tree using
the expected value.
The two criteria used by the C4.5 decision trees in
developing its DT are presented in equations (5) and (6) as
the information gain and the split criteria respectively.
45

=

|6|

 6:7 |3| 

Where:
= ;
)%

6:7

(5)

| , |
| , |
 log "
| |
| |

< =  6:7

|6|

|3|

 log "

|6|

|3|

(6)

d Model simulation process and environment
The Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis
(WEKA) software  a suite of machine learning algorithms
was used as the simulation environment for the development
of the predictive model. The software is freely available at
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka. The system was
written using object-oriented language, Java. There are
several different levels at which Weka can be used. Weka
provides implantations of state-of-the-art data mining and
machine learning algorithms. Weka contains modules for
data preprocessing, classification, clustering and association
rule extraction for market basket analysis.

The main features of Weka include:
a 49 data preprocessing tools;
b 76 classification/regression algorithms;
c 8 clustering algorithms;
d 15 attribute/subset evaluators + 10 search algorithms for
feature selection;
e 3 algorithms for finding association rules; and
f 3 graphical user interfaces, namely:
g The Explorer for exploratory data analysis;
h The Experimenter for experimental environment; and
i The Knowledge Flow, a new process model inspired
interface.
The datasets were subjected to 10-fold cross validation
using the two (2) selected decision trees learning algorithms,
namely: C4.5 implemented as the J48 algorithm on WEKA
and the ID3 algorithm. Before subjecting the historical
datasets containing the values of the risk factors alongside
the risk of hypertension for each respondents record in the
original dataset; there was the need of storing the dataset
according to the default format for data representation needed
for data mining tasks on the Weka environment. The default
file type is called the attribute relation file format (.arff). the
arff file type stores three category of data: the first defining
the title of the relation, the second defining the relations
attributes alongside their respective labels and the third
defining the relations data followed for the values of each
attributes for each record. The dataset collected was divided
into two parts: training and testing data  the training data
was used to formulate the model while the test data was used
to validate the model. The process of training and testing
predictive model according to literature is a very difficult
experience especially with the various available validation
procedures.
e Model validation and evaluation metrics
For this classification problem, it was natural to measure a
classifiers performance in terms of the error rate. The
classifier predicted the class of each instance  the record
containing values for each risk of hypertension: if it is
correct, that is counted as a success; if not, it is an error. The
error rate being the proportion of errors made over a whole
set of instances, and thus measured the overall performance
of the classifier. The error rate on the training data set was
not likely to be a good indicator of future performance;
because the DT classifiers were been learned from the very
same training data. In order to predict the performance of a
classifier on new data, there was the need to assess the error
rate of the predictive model on a dataset that played no part
in the formation of the classifier. This independent dataset
was called the test dataset  which was a representative
sample of the underlying problem as was the training data.
The process of leaving a part of a whole dataset as testing
data while the rest is used for training the model is called the
holdout method. The challenge here is the need to be able to
find a good classifier by using as much of the whole
historical data as possible for training; to obtain a good error
estimate and use as much as possible for model testing. It is a
common trend to holdout one-third of the whole historical

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2017; 2(2): 48-59

dataset for testing and the remaining two-thirds for training.
For this study the cross-validation procedure was employed,
which involved dividing the whole datasets into a number of
folds (or partitions) of the data. Each partition was selected
for testing with the remaining k  1 partitions used for
training; the next partition was used for testing with the
remaining k  1 partitions (including the first partition used
or testing) used for training until all k partitions had been
selected for testing. The error rate recorded from each
process was added up with the mean the mean error rate
recorded. The process used in this study was the stratified 10fold cross validation method which involves splitting the
whole dataset into ten partitions. Figure 2 shows a
representation of the 10-fold cross validation process.

53

The performance metrics are thus defined as follows:
Sensitivity/True positive rate/Recall: is the proportion
of actual positive cases that were correctly predicted
positive by the model.
= *=

7>

7>?@A

(7)

Figure 3. Confusion matrix for model performance.

False Positive rate/False alarm: is the proportion of
actual negative cases that were predicted as positive by
the model.
B %

%

&=

@>

@>?7A

(8)

Precision: is the proportion of the predicted
positive/negative cases that were actually positive or
negative. Equations (9) and (10) show the precision for
positive and negative cases.

Figure 2. 10-fold cross validation process.

During the course of evaluating the predictive model, a
number of metrics were used to quantify the models
performance. In order to determine these metrics, four
parameters must be identified from the results of predictions
made by the classifier during model testing. These are: true
positive (TP), true negative (TN), false positive (FP) and
false negative (FP). In this study which involves a binary
classification, either of survived and not survived can be
considered as positive while the others negative (e.g. if low is
considered as a positive then moderate and high are negatives
and vice versa).
True positives are the correct prediction of positive cases,
true negatives are the correct prediction of negative cases,
false positives are the negative cases predicted as positives
while false negatives are positive cases predicted as
negatives. These results are presented on confusion matrix
(Figure 3)  for this study the confusion matrix is a 3 x 3
owing to the three labels for the output class but for
simplicity of the notion of positives and negatives using a 2 x
2 confusion matrix is presented. The four parameters were
used to formulate the metrics discussed as follows:

C D

)

C D

= D%

= D%

=

=

7>?@>

7>

(9)

@A?7A

7A

(10)

Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristics
(ROC) curve: is the area of the curve plotted by the
graph of the true positive rate (sensitivity) against the
true negative rate (specificity) for the different instances
of test datasets used for testing the predictive model for
hypertension risk.
Accuracy: is the total number of correct classifications
(positive and negative)
EDDF

D* =

7A?7>

7A?7>?@A?@>

(11)

4. Results and Discussion of Predictive
Model for Hypertension Risk
For this study, data was collected from 32 patients using
the questionnaires constructed for this study among which;
the risk of hypertension was identified for 22 patents while
the risk of hypertension was not identified for the remaining
10 patients. This was done in order to use the dataset of the
22 patients to formulate (train and test) the predictive model

54

Idowu Peter Adebayo: Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm

for the risk of hypertension while the dataset of the remaining
10 patients was used for the external validation of the
predictive model in order to determine the risk of
hypertension using the formulated and validated model.
Figure 4 shows a screenshot of the data collected from the
32 respondents selected for this study. The data was stored in
the attribute relation file format (.arff) which is the
acceptable format for the data mining simulation
environment selected for this study. The format required the
identification of three (3) parts of the dataset, namely:
a The relation section: was used to identify the name of
the file identified which in this case is hypertension-all
for the data containing all 32 patients, hypertensiontraining for the data containing the 22 respondents
selected for training and testing the model after
formulation and hypertension-testing for the data
containing the 10 respondents which were used for the
external validation of the model. The relations tag is
identified using the name @relation before the relation
name;

b The attribute section: was used to identify the
fields/attributes (risk factors) identified as the input
variables for the risk of hypertension where the last
attributes describes the risk of hypertension. There are
22 attributes identified in the file with the first 21
identifying the input variables (risk factors of the risk of
hypertension) while the last variable is the risk of
hypertension. Each attributes has its own respective
label which shows the possible values that can be stated
by each attribute defined in the dataset. The attribute
tag for each attribute is identified using the name
@attribute before each attribute name; and
c The data section: was used to identify the dataset values
for each respondents collected in the same order as the
attributes were listed. Each respondents record of data
is represented as the set of values on each line with the
risk of hypertension shown on the last portion of each
line. The data containing the values of the attributes for
each respondent is listed on the line following the name
tag identified as @data.

Figure 4. Data collected for all 32 respondents collected.

Table 1 gives a description of the number of patients
with their respective risk of hypertension from the 22
patient records selected for model formulation and
validation which were stored in the hypertensiontraining.arff file. The table shows that out of the 22
patients considered; 8 (36.4%) had low risk of
hypertension, 4 (18.1%) had high risk of hypertension
while 10 (45.5%) had moderate risk of hypertension. It
was observed that the highest case presented was for
respondents with moderate risk of hypertension while the
least case was presented for respondents with high risk of
hypertension. From the dataset that was collected, it was
observed that majority were female  bout 71.9% of all
respondents considered for the study with just 28.1%
male.

Table 1. Distribution of hypertension risk among historical dataset.
Hypertension risk
Low
Moderate
High
Total

Frequency
8
10
4
22

Percentage (%)
36.4
45.5
18.1
100.0

Majority of the respondents also lies in the age group of
above 60 years (53.1%) and 25% of the respondents within
the age group of 51 to 60 years of age while the remaining
21.9% belonged to the age group of below 50 years. Also,
31.25% of the respondents had educational qualifications of
first School leaving certificate (primary school) and senior
school certificate (SSCE) but 18.8% of respondents had no
formal education. 50% of the respondents were traders by
occupation, 21.88% were public servants while 15.6% were

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2017; 2(2): 48-59

artisans by profession. 93.75% of the respondents were
married while the remaining percentage was single and 50%
of the respondents worked as marketers with 21.88%
working at the operations. Majority of the respondents live in
the town (71.88%) with most of the respondents been Yoruba
(90.6%).
Based on the clinical information inferred from the
respondents, the following were identified from the
information provided. 68.75% of respondents had no family
history of hypertension with the remaining having first
generation family members with hypertension. 53.1% of the
respondents had a normal BMI while about 18.8% were
obese. 53.13% of respondents had daily exercises with
18.75% having their exercise done weekly or rarely. 50% of
the respondents had issues at home  either with their
spouses or from the children while 25% sometimes
experience issues at home. About 50% of the respondents
never experience stress at the office but 28% sometimes
experience stress at the office. From the respondents, it was
observed that the minimum hours spent in the office was 4
hours while the maximum hours spent was 8 hours with an
average of 7 hours spent at the office.
Based on the social habits of the respondents, the
following information were identified. 29 (90.62%) of
respondents do not engage in smoking but the remaining
percentage owed for 3 smokers for which the minimum
sticks consumed was 4 with a maximum consumption of 10
sticks daily. Out of the respondents, 12 (37.5%) indulged in
the habit of drinking out of which 7 drink stout, 3 drink beer
while 1 drink Gin and Wine; the maximum bottles consumed
was 2 with a minimum of 1. Also, the maximum length of
years of consuming alcohol was 35 years with a minimum
length of 5 years.
a Model formulation and simulation results using the C4.5
DT algorithm
From the dataset collected from the respondents, the
training data was used for the formulation of the predictive
model needed for the prediction of the risk of hypertension.
The J4.8 decision trees algorithm was used to implement the
C4.5 decision trees algorithm for the formulation of the
predictive model using the simulation environment. The
results of the formulation of the predictive model for the risk
of hypertension using the C4.5 decision trees algorithm
showed that four (4) variables were the most important risk
factors of hypertension and were used by the algorithm to
develop the tree that was used in formulating the predictive
model for risk of hypertension using the C4.5 decision trees
algorithm. The variables identified in the order of their
importance were:
Alcohol brand;
Exercise;
Marital issues; and
Gender of the respondent.
Based on the four (4) variables identified by the C4.5
decision tees algorithm, the predictive model for the risk of
hypertension was formulated based on the results of the
simulation using the J48 decision trees algorithm on the

55

WEKA simulation environment. Figure 5 shows the decision
trees that was formulated based on the four (4) variables that
were proposed by the algorithm. The tree was used to deduce
the set of rules that were proposed for determining the risk of
hypertension based on the values of the four variables
identified by the algorithm.

Figure 5. Decision Tree formulated using C4.5 for Risk of Hypertension.

The rules extracted from the tree are as follows:
i IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = daily) AND
(marital issues = never) and (sex = male) THEN (risk
of hypertension = Low);
ii IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = daily) AND
(sex = female) THEN (risk of hypertension =
Moderate);
iii IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = daily) AND
(marital issues = sometimes) THEN (risk of
hypertension = Low);
iv IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = daily) AND
(marital issues = rarely) THEN (risk of hypertension =
Moderate);
v IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = weekly)
THEN (risk of hypertension = Moderate);
vi IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = rarely)
THEN (risk of hypertension = Moderate);
vii IF (alcohol brand = nil) AND (exercise = never)
THEN (risk of hypertension = High);
viii IF (alcohol brand = stout) THEN (risk of hypertension
= Low);
ix IF (alcohol brand = beer) THEN (risk of hypertension
= High);
x IF (alcohol brand = gin) THEN (risk of hypertension =
Moderate); and
xi IF (alcohol brand = wine) THEN (risk of hypertension
= High).
Following the simulation of the predictive model for risk

56

Idowu Peter Adebayo: Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm

of hypertension using the C4.5 decision trees algorithm, the
evaluation of the performance of the model following
internal validation using the 10-fold cross validation method
was recorded. Figure 6 shows the confusion matrix that was
used to interpret the results of the true positive and negative
alongside the false positive and negatives of the validation
results. The confusion matrix shown was used to evaluate the
performance of the predictive model for risk of hypertension.

showed that four (4) variables were the most important risk
factors of hypertension and were used by the algorithm to
develop the tree that was used in formulating the predictive
model for risk of hypertension using the ID3 decision trees
algorithm. The variables identified in the order of their
importance were:
Length of work (in hours);
Marital issues;
Sex; and
Occupation.
Based on the four (4) variables identified by the ID3
decision tees algorithm, the predictive model for the risk of
hypertension was formulated based on the results of the
simulation using the J48 decision trees algorithm on the
WEKA simulation environment. Figure 7 shows the decision
trees that was formulated based on the four (4) variables that
were proposed by the algorithm. The tree was used to deduce
the set of rules that were proposed for determining the risk of
hypertension based on the values of the four variables
identified by the algorithm.

Figure 6. Confusion matrix of performance evaluation using C4.5.

From the confusion matrix shown in figure 4.2, the
following sections present the results of the models
performance. Out of the 8 low cases, there were 7 correct
classifications with 1 misclassified as moderate risk; out of
the 10 moderate risk cases, there were 8 correct
classifications with 2 misclassified as low risks and all 4 high
risk cases were correctly classified. Therefore, there were 19
correct classifications out of the 22 records considered for the
model development owing for an accuracy of 86.36%. Table
2 shows the summary of the evaluation results.
Table 2. Summary of the results of performance evaluation using C4.5.
Performance Metrics
TP rate (sensitivity/recall)

FP rate (false alarm rate)

Precision

ROC

Risk Labels
Low
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High

Values
0.875
0.800
1.000
0.143
0.083
0.000
0.778
0.889
1.000
0.929
0.933
1.000

Average

Figure 7. Decision Tree formulated using ID3 for Risk of hypertension.

0.892

The rules extracted from the tree are as follows:
i IF (length of work <= 5 hours) THEN (risk of
hypertension = Moderate);
ii IF (length of work = 6 hours) AND (marital issues =
never/sometimes) THEN (risk of hypertension =
Low);
iii IF (length of work = 6 hours) AND (marital issues =
always) THEN (risk of hypertension = Moderate);
iv IF (length of work = 7-8 hours) AND (sex = male)
THEN (risk of hypertension = Low);
v IF (length of work = 7-8 hours) AND (sex = female)
THEN (risk of hypertension = Moderate);
vi IF (length of work = 9-10 hours) AND (occupation =
trader/public service) THEN (risk of hypertension =
Low);
vii IF (length of work = 9-10 hours) AND (occupation =
artisan/none) THEN (risk of hypertension =
Moderate);
viii IF (length of work = 9-10 hours) AND (occupation =
private) THEN (risk of hypertension = High); and

0.075

0.889

0.954

b Model formulation and simulation results using the ID3
DT algorithm
From the dataset collected from the respondents, the
training data was used for the formulation of the predictive
model needed for the prediction of the risk of hypertension.
The ID3 decision trees algorithm was used to implement the
ID3 decision trees algorithm for the formulation of the
predictive model using the simulation environment. The
results of the formulation of the predictive model for the risk
of hypertension using the ID3 decision trees algorithm

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2017; 2(2): 48-59

ix IF (length of work > 10 hours) THEN (risk of
hypertension = High).
Following the simulation of the predictive model for risk
of hypertension using the ID3 decision trees algorithm, the
evaluation of the performance of the model following
internal validation using the 10-fold cross validation method
was recorded. Figure 8 shows the confusion matrix that was
used to interpret the results of the true positive and negative
alongside the false positive and negatives of the validation
results. The confusion matrix was used to evaluate the
performance of the predictive model for risk of hypertension.

Figure 8. Confusion matrix of performance evaluation using ID3.

From the confusion matrix shown in figure 8, the
following sections present the results of the models
performance. Out of the 8 low cases, all were correctly
classified; out of the 10 moderate risk cases, all were
correctly classified and out of the 4 high risk cases, all were
correctly classified. Therefore, the overall accuracy of the
ID3 algorithm was 100%. Table 3 shows the summary of the
evaluation results.
Table 3. Summary of the results of performance evaluation using ID3.
Performance Metrics
TP rate (sensitivity/recall)
FP rate
(false alarm rate)
Precision

ROC

Risk Labels
Low
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High

Values
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

Average
1.000

0.000

1.000

1.000

The result of the performance evaluation of the C4.5
algorithm was presented in Table 2. The true positive rate
which gave a description of the proportion of actual cases that
was correctly predicted showed values of 0.875, 0.8 and 1.00
for the low, moderate and high cases respectively presented
owing for an average value of 0.892  89.2% of the actual
risks was correctly predicted by the predictive model. The
false positive rate which gave a description of the proportion
of predicted cases that was incorrectly classified showed
values of 0.143, 0.083 and 0.00 for the low, moderate and high

57

risk cases respectively presented owing for an average value of
0075  7.5% of the predicted cases were misclassified. The
precision which gave a description of the proportion of the
predicted cases that was correctly classified showed values of
0.778, 0.889 and 1.00 for the low, moderate and high risk cases
respectively owing for an average value of 0.889  88.9% of
the predicted cases were actually correct. The receiver
operating characteristics curve which gave a description of
how well the predictive model was able to discriminate
between all three risk cases showed values of 0.929, 0.933 and
1.00 for the low, moderate and high risk cases respectively
owing for an average value of 0.954  95.5% of the area under
the ROC was covered in the plot of the TP rate against the FP
rate, which implies that the model showed good capability of
discriminating between the risks of hypertension.
The results of the performance evaluation of the ID3
algorithm shown in Table 3 as presented is discussed is
discussed in the following paragraphs. The true positive rate
which gave a description of the proportion of actual cases
that was correctly predicted showed values of 1.000 each for
the low, moderate and high cases presented owing for an
average value of 1.000  100% of the actual risks was
correctly predicted by the predictive model. The false
positive rate which gave a description of the proportion of
predicted cases that was incorrectly classified showed values
of 0.000 each for the low, moderate and high risk cases
presented owing for an average value of 0.000  0% of the
predicted cases were misclassified. The precision which gave
a description of the proportion of the predicted cases that was
correctly classified showed values of 1.000 each for the low,
moderate and high risk cases owing for an average value of
1.000  100% of the predicted cases were actually correct.
The receiver operating characteristics curve which gave a
description of how well the predictive model was able to
discriminate between all three risk cases showed values of
1.000 each for the low, moderate and high risk cases owing
for an average value of 1.000  100% of the area under the
ROC was covered in the plot of the TP rate against the FP
rate, which implies that the model showed good capability of
discriminating between the risk of hypertension.
Based on the results of the evaluation of the performance
of the two (2) decision trees algorithm proposed for this
study, the ID3 decision trees algorithm was observed to show
the best performance based on the results of the true positive
(TP) rate, false positive (FP) rate, precision, area under the
ROC curve and the accuracy of the predictive models
validation using the training dataset for the study.

5. Conclusion
This study focused on the development of a prediction
model using identified risk factors in order to classify the risk
of hypertension in selected respondents for this study.
Historical dataset on the distribution of the risk of hypertension
among respondents was collected using questionnaires
following the identification of associated risk factors of
hypertension from expert medical practitioners. The dataset

58

Idowu Peter Adebayo: Predictive Model for the Classification of Hypertension Risk Using Decision Trees Algorithm

containing information about the risk factors identified and
collected from the respondents was used to formulate
predictive model for the risk of hypertension using two (2)
decision trees algorithm  C4.5 and ID3. The predictive model
development using the decision trees algorithm was
formulated and simulated using the WEKA software.
Following the identification of the features relevant for the
risk of hypertension among the respondents selected for this
study, four (4) variables were identified by both decision
trees algorithm although two (2) of the variables were
observed to be common among both models, namely: the
marital issues and the sex of the respondents. The predictive
model developed using the dataset showed good results with
both algorithm having very high rates of properly
discriminating between the different risks of hypertension
with the results of the ID3 algorithm outperforming that of
the C4.5 decision trees algorithm. The variables identified by
the prediction model and the tree constructed from the
decision tree using the variables can help provide insight into
the relationship that exist between the variables (risk factors)
with respect to the classification of the risk of hypertension.
Following the development of the prediction model for
hypertension risk classification, a better understanding of the
relationship between the attributes relevant to CML survival
was proposed. The model can also be integrated into existing
Health Information System (HIS) which captures and
manages clinical information which can be fed to the
hypertension risk classification prediction model thus
improving the clinical decisions affecting hypertension risk
and the real-time assessment of clinical information affecting
hypertension risk from remote locations. It is advised that a
continual assessment of variables monitored for hypertension
risk be made in order to increase the number of information
relevant to creating an improved prediction model for
hypertension risk classification using the proposed model in
this study.

References
[1]

Jing-Song, L., Hai-Yan, Y. and Xiao-Guang, Z. (2011). Data
Mining in Hospital Information System. In New Fundamental
Technologies in Data Mining, Prof. Kimito Funatsu (Ed.).
ISBN:
978-953-307-547-1.
Available
from:
http://www.intechopen.com/books/new-fundamentaltechnologies-in-data-mining/data-miningin-hospitalinformation-system.

[2]

Aqueel, A. and Shaikh, A. H. (2012). Data Mining Techniques
to find out Heart Diseases: An Overview. International
Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering
(IJITEE) 1 (4): 16.

[3]

Chen, J., and Greiner, R. (1999). Comparing Bayesian
Network Classifiers. In Proceedings of UAI-99: 101108.

[4]

Agbelusi, O. (2014). Development of a predictive model for
survival of HIV/AIDS patients in South-western Nigeria,
Unpublished MPhil Thesis, Obafemi Awolowo University, IleIfe, Nigeria.

[5]

Idowu, P. A., Aladekomo, T. A., Williams, K. O. and Balogun,
J. A. (2015). Predictive model for likelihood of Sickle cell
aneamia (SCA) among pediatric patients using fuzzy logic.
Transactions in networks and communications 31 (1): 3144.

[6]

Waijee, A. K., Higgings, P. D. R. and Singal, A. G. (2013). A
Primer on Predictive Models. Clinical and Translational
Gastroenterology 4 (44): 14.

[7]

Lackland, D. T. and Weber, M. A. (2015). Global burden of
cardiovascular disease and stroke: hypertension at the core.
The Canadian journal of cardiology 31 (5): 56971.
doi:10.1016/j.cjca.2015.01.009.

[8]

Poulter, N. R., Prabhakaran, D. and Caulfield, M. (2015).
Hypertension.
Lancet
386(9995):
801812.
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(14)61468-9.

[9]

[10Carretero, O. A. and Oparil, S. (2000). Essential
hypertension, Part I: definition and etiology. Circulation 101
(3): 32935. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.101.3.329.

[10] Wokoma, F. S. and Alasia, D. D. (2011). Blood pressure
pattern in Barako: a rural community in Rivers State, Nigeria.
Niger Health J 11: 8-13.
[11] World Health Organization, WHO (2011). WHO Maps: Noncommunicable disease trend in all countries. World Health
Global Report, World Health Organization.
[12] Unachukwu, C. N., Agomuoh, D. I. and Alasia, D. D. (2008).
Pattern of non-communicable diseases among medical
admissions in Port Harcourt, Nigeria. Niger J Clin Pract 11:
14-17.
[13] World Health Organization, WHO (2002). The World Health
Report: 2002: Reducing the Risks, Promoting Healthy Life.
World Health Organization, Geneva.
[14] Omran, A. R. (1971). The epidemiologic transition: A theory
of the epidemiology of population change. Milbank Mem
Fund Q 49: 509-38.
[15] Cressman, M. D. and Gifford, R. W. (1983). Hypertension and
stroke. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 1: 521527.
[16] Post, W. S., Hill, M. N. and Dennison, J. L. (2003). High
prevalence of target organ damage in young, African
American Inner-city men with hypertension. Journal of
clinical hypertension 5: 24-30.
[17] Khakurel, S., Agrawal, R. K. and Hada, R. (2009). Pattern of
end stage renal disease in a tertiary care center. Journal of the
Nepal Medical Association 48: 126130.
[18] Cuspidi, C., Lonati, L., Sampieri, L., Michev, L., Macca, G.,
Rocanova, J. I., Salerno, M., Fusi, V., Leonetti, G. and Zanchetti,
A. (2000). Prevalence of target organ damage in treated
hypertensive patients: different impact of clinic and ambulatory
blood pressure control. Journal of Hypertension 18: 803-809.
[19] Neal, B., MacMahon, S. and Chapman, N. (2000). Effects of
ACE inhibitors, calcium antagonists and other blood pressure
lowering drugs: results of prospectively designed overviews of
randomized controlled trials. Lancet 356: 1955-1964.
[20] Nornchahal, K., Ashton, W. D. and Wood, D. A. (2000).
Alcohol consumption, metabolic cardiovascular risk factors
and hypertension in women. Int J Epdermiol 29: 57-64.

American Journal of Mathematical and Computer Modelling 2017; 2(2): 48-59

59

[21] Laurenzi, M., Mancini, M., Menotti, A, Stamler, J., Stamler,
R., Trevisan, M. and Zanchetti, A. (1990). Multiple risk
factors in hypertension: results from the Gubbio study. J
Hypertens 8 (Supplementary): 7-12.

Selection for Medical Data Mining: Comparisons of Expert
Judgment and Automatic Approaches. In Proceedings of the
19th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems
(CBMS'06).

[22] Chukwuonye, I. I., Chuku, A., Onyeonoro, U. U., Madukwe,
O. O., Oviasu, E. and Ogah, O. S. (2013). A rural and urban
cross-sectional study on alcohol consumption among adult
Nigerians in Abia state. Int J Med Biomed Res 2: 179-185.

[27] Shillabeer, A. and Roddick, J (2007). Establishing a Lineage
for Medical Knowledge Discovery. ACM International
Conference Proceeding Series 311 (70): 29-37.

[23] Nwaneli, C. U. and Omejua, E. G. (2010). Clinical
presentation and aetiology of hypertension in young adults in
Nnewi South East Nigeria. Afrimed J 1: 24-26.
[24] Oladapo, O. O., Salako, L., Sadiq, L., Shoyinka, K., Adedapo,
K. and Falase, A. O. (2012). Target-organ damage and
cardiovascular complications in hypertensive Nigerian Yoruba
adults: a cross-sectional study. Cardiovasc J Afr 23: 379-384.
[25] Diwe, K. C., Enwere, O. O., Uwakwe, K. A., Duru, C. B. and
Chineke, H. N. (2015). Prevalence and awareness of
hypertension and associated risk factors among bank workers
in Owerri, Nigeria. Int J Med Biomed Res 4 (3): 142-148.
[26] Cheng, T. H., Wei, C. P. and Tseng, V. S. (2006). Feature

View publication stats

[28] Cao, X., Maloney, K. B. and Brusic, V. (2008). Data mining of
cancer vaccine trials: a bird's-eye view. Immunome Research
4:7 - 11. DOI:10.1186/1745-7580-4-7.
[29] Mayilvaganan, M and Rajeswari, K. (2014). Human Blood
Pressure Classification Analysis Using Fuzzy Logic Control
System in Data Mining. International Journal of Emerging
Trends and Technology in Computer Science (IJETICS) 3 (1):
305306.
[30] Waghmare, K. (2013). Prediction of Occurrence of NonCommunicable Diseases Depending on Lifestyle Habits
Clustering Data Mining Technique. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Emerging Research in
Computing, Information, Communication and Applications
ERCICA, 2013: 15.

