SPOTLIGHT ON BIOPHARMACEUTICALS CAREERS

Computer-calculated
compounds
Researchers are deploying artificial intelligence to discover drugs.

ILLUSTRATION BY MICHELE MARCONI

BY NIC FLEMING

A

n enormous figure looms over scientists
searching for new drugs: the estimated
US$2.6-billion price tag of developing
a treatment. A lot of that effectively goes down
the drain, because it includes money spent on
the nine out of ten candidate therapies that fail
somewhere between phase I trials and regulatory approval. Few people in the field doubt the
need to do things differently.
Leading biopharmaceutical companies
believe a solution is at hand. Pfizer is using IBM
Watson, a system that uses machine learning, to

power its search for immuno-oncology drugs.
Sanofi has signed a deal to use UK start-up
Exscientias artificial-intelligence (AI) platform to hunt for metabolic-disease therapies,
and Roche subsidiary Genentech is using an
AI system from GNS Healthcare in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, to help drive the multinational
companys search for cancer treatments.
Most sizeable biopharma players have similar
collaborations or internal programmes.
If the proponents of these techniques are
right, AI and machine learning will usher in

an era of quicker, cheaper and more-effective
drug discovery. Some are sceptical, but most
experts do expect these tools to become
increasingly important. This shift presents
both challenges and opportunities for scientists, especially when the techniques are combined with automation (see Here come the
robots). Early-career researchers, in particular,
need to get to grips with what AI can do and
how best to acquire the skills they need to be
employable in the job market of tomorrow.
The AI pioneers of the 1950s discussed
3 1 M AY 2 0 1 8 | VO L 5 5 7 | NAT U R E | S 5 5

 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

CAREERS SPOTLIGHT ON BIOPHARMACEUTICALS
building machines that could sense, reason
and think like people  a concept known
as general AI that is likely to remain in the
realms of science fiction for some time. However, the continued rapid growth in computerprocessing power over the past two decades,
the availability of large data sets and the development of advanced algorithms have driven
major improvements in machine learning.
This has helped to bring about narrow AI,
which focuses on specific tasks. These include
improved abilities to analyse, understand and
generate text and speech through an AI technique called natural-language processing, and
artificial neural networks designed to mimic
the way our brains make sense of the world.
Such techniques are already in widespread use
in fields such as computer vision, voice analysis and route selection. This progress has also
triggered a wave of start-ups that employ AI
for drug discovery, with many of them using
it to identify patterns hidden in large volumes
of data.
For example, researchers at biotechnology
company Berg, near Boston, Massachusetts,
have developed a model to identify previously
unknown cancer mechanisms using tests on
more than 1,000 cancerous and healthy human
cell samples. They modelled diseased human
cells by varying the levels of sugar and oxygen
the cells were exposed to, and then tracked their
lipid, metabolite, enzyme and protein profiles.
The group uses its AI platform to generate and
analyse immense amounts of biological and
outcomes data from patients to highlight key
differences between diseased and healthy cells.
The aim of Bergs approach is to identify
potential treatments on the basis of the precise
biological causes of disease. We are turning
the drug-discovery paradigm upside down by
using patient-driven biology and data to derive
more-predictive hypotheses, rather than the traditional trial-and-error approach, says Niven
Narain, Bergs co-founder and chief executive.
Using this approach, Narains team identified
the importance of certain naturally occurring
molecules in cancer metabolism. This led
the group to discover how a new cancer drug
works, and indicated some possible therapeutic uses. The drug, BPM31510, is currently in
a phase II clinical trial involving people with
advanced pancreatic cancer. The company
is also using this AI system to look for drug
targets and therapies for other conditions,
including diabetes and Parkinsons disease.
London-based start-up firm BenevolentBio
has its own AI platform, into which it feeds
data from sources such as research papers,
patents, clinical trials and patient records.
This forms a representation, based in the
cloud, of more than one billion known and
inferred relationships between biological
entities such as genes, symptoms, diseases,
proteins, tissues, species and candidate drugs.
This can be queried rather like a search engine,
to produce knowledge graphs of, for example, a medical condition and the genes that

are associated with it, or the compounds that
have been shown to affect it. Most of the data
that the platform crunches are not annotated,
so it uses natural-language processing to recognize entities and understand their links to
other things. AI can put all this data in context
and surface the most salient information for
drug-discovery scientists, says Jackie Hunter,
chief executive of BenevolentBio.

AI IS GOING TO
LEAD TO THE FULL

UNDERSTANDING
OF HUMAN BIOLOGY
AND GIVE US
THE MEANS TO

FULLY ADDRESS
HUMAN DISEASE.

When the company asked this system to
suggest new ways to treat amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), also known as motor neuron
disease (MND), it flagged around 100 existing
compounds as having potential. From these, scientists at BenevolentBio selected five to undergo
tests using patient-derived cells at the Sheffield
Institute of Translational Neuroscience, UK.
The research, presented at the International
Symposium on ALS/MND in Boston, Massachusetts, in December 2017, found that four
of these compounds had promise, and one was
shown to delay neurological symptoms in mice.

PATTERN RECOGNITION

Despite these promising applications, many
scientists are unaware of the capabilities of AI.
A survey published in February by BenchSci,
a start-up in Toronto, Canada, that provides a
machine-learning tool for scientists searching
for antibodies, found that 41% of the 330 drugdiscovery researchers who took part were
unfamiliar with the uses of AI (see go.nature.
com/2xarpt3).
Leaders in the field think that researchers
should brush up on this knowledge as soon as
possible.
AI is going to lead to the full understanding of human biology and give us the means
to fully address human disease, says Thomas
Chittenden, who leads a team at Wuxi NextCODE in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Wuxi
NextCODE was formed in 2015 after drugdiscovery firm WuXi AppTec in Shanghai,
China, acquired NextCODE Health, a spin-off
from Icelandic company deCODE Genetics.
The way we develop drugs and assess them
in clinical trials will all come down to very
sophisticated pattern recognition, he says.
In May 2017, a group including researchers

at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut,
demonstrated the role of a family of proteins
called fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) in
blood-vessel development (P. Yu et al. Nature
545, 224228; 2017). This process is key to both
tumour growth and cardiovascular disease.
Wuxi NextCODE uses AI as part of its approach
of classifying genes according to their roles
and other attributes, to look for connections
between RNA-sequence variations, expression
levels, molecular function and gene location.
Using this approach, Chittendens team discovered that FGFs exert their influence through the
control of glucose metabolism.
Some think the potential of AI to pinpoint previously unknown causes of disease
will accelerate the trend towards treatments
designed for patients with specific biological profiles. Personalized medicine has been
talked about for a long time, says Hunter. AI
is going to enable it.
Sceptics point out that some of these more
enthusiastic claims echo the excitement over
computer-aided drug design, which began in
the early 1980s. Although such in silico modelling techniques are important in modern drug
research and development (R&D), they have
not halted a decline in pharmaceutical-industry
R&D productivity dating back to the mid-1990s.

MOVING GOALPOSTS

Whatever happens, industry leaders agree that
drug-discovery jobs and the skills needed to do
them are unlikely to remain the same. Some
think that broader training is needed. Narain
says that there needs to be a radical shift
in the way PhDs and other graduate courses
are conducted, and that this should extend
to medical-school and undergraduate teaching. He adds, The years of students focusing
solely on  and learning more than anyone
else about  a particular gene mutation, say,
are over. Chittenden agrees: The PhD is
going to look very different ten years from
now. Academic curricula will be broader. The
next generation needs, first and foremost, the
understanding of human biology, but coupled
with computer science, computational statistics and statistical machine learning.
Others think it is more a case of picking up
the basics without diverting attention from core
areas of expertise. Undergraduates in biology
need to move towards basic competency in
statistics and computational ideas, says Russ
Altman, a biomedical AI researcher at Stanford University in California. But at PhD level,
people need to acquire deep, technical skills.
They will be paid for depth, not breadth.
In 2003, Altman co-launched an undergraduate degree in biomedical computation
for students who want to delve deeply into
both disciplines. It was relaunched within his
institutions bioengineering department in
March. I think that at Stanford were getting
an early look at what is going to be happening
at campuses worldwide, he says.
There is little consensus about how, even

S 5 6 | NAT U R E | VO L 5 5 7 | 3 1 M AY 2 0 1 8

 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

SPOTLIGHT ON BIOPHARMACEUTICALS CAREERS

H E R E C O ME T H E R O B OTS
A new type of scientist
When the time comes for the history of
artificial intelligence (AI) to be written, the
algorithm that gets the job is likely to flag
12 June 2007 as worthy of note. That was
the day that a robot called Adam ended
humanitys monopoly on the discovery of
scientific knowledge  by identifying the
function of a yeast gene.
By searching public databases, Adam
generated hypotheses about which genes
code for key enzymes that catalyse reactions
in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and
used robotics to physically test its predictions
in a lab. Researchers at the UK universities
of Aberystwyth and Cambridge then
independently tested Adams hypotheses
about the functions of 19 genes; 9 were new
and accurate, and only 1 was wrong.
Robot scientists using AI can test more
compounds, and do so with improved
accuracy and reproducibility, and exhaustive,
searchable record-keeping, says systems
biologist Steve Oliver of the University of
Cambridge, a member of the group that
developed Adam.

just a decade from now, AI will affect the skills
needed to discover the therapies of the future.
Being able to code will be useful for at least
the next 510 years, but my suspicion is that,
beyond that, computers will largely do it for
us, says computational medicinal chemist
Anthony Bradley at the University of Oxford,
UK. In the lab, we might need a more highly
trained, specialized workforce working with
the automation and AI experts to fine-tune
processes in particular reaction areas, he
says. Or, he adds, it might be that wet-lab skills
(those needed to perform practical chemical or
biological experiments) might be no use ten
years from now.
Bradley uses the Diamond Light Source synchrotron near Oxford to screen compounds for
small chemical fragments that bind to molecular targets, even if only weakly, with the aim of
improving their binding strength to produce
new therapies. He is a member of a group that is
using artificial neural networks  an approach
to training algorithms inspired by the way our
brains process information  as part of a structure-based drug-design project with the Oxford
Protein Informatics Group. The aim is to use
publicly available data on the structural and
chemical activity of small molecules to teach
their system to identify those that will act on
protein drug targets.
What can those hoping to work in drug
discovery do to prepare themselves for this
rapidly evolving environment? Taking steps
to become informed and flexible are important, say those at the cutting edge of the field.

In January, the same team announced
that Adams more advanced robot
colleague, Eve, had discovered that triclosan,
a common ingredient in toothpaste, could
potentially treat drug-resistant malaria
parasites. The researchers developed
strains of yeast in which genes essential
for growth had been replaced with their
equivalents either from malaria parasites or
from humans. Eve then screened thousands
of compounds to find those that halted or
severely slowed the growth of the strains
dependent on the malaria genes but not
those containing the human genes  to
target the parasites while reducing the risk
of toxicity. Early results were used to inform
the selection of later candidates to screen.
This identified triclosan as affecting
malaria-parasite growth by inhibiting the
DHFR enzyme  also the target of the
antimalarial drug pyrimethamine. However,
resistance to pyrimethamine is common.
The researchers showed that triclosan
could act on DHFR even in pyrimethamineresistant parasites. N.F.

My training gave me the groundwork so that I
knew roughly where the field was, but to some
extent its down to students themselves to see
the way technological trends are going, says
Bradley. Only by remaining versatile can you
make the best use of the power of the available
tools. He advises those seeking to enter the
drug-discovery field to keep track of developments in AI by monitoring the latest articles in
leading journals and technology-focused news
sources and blogs.
Self-driven learning is especially important,
Bradley says, because there are limits to how
well universities can provide the skills that students need to be ready for the future role of AI
in research. Almost by definition, he says, no
one can really know what those skills will be.
Some of the more extravagant predictions
being made about the ability of AI to revolutionize drug discovery might well turn out to
be overblown. Critics point out that there are
commercial interests at play, and that, as yet,
there are no approved AI-developed drugs.
Narain, who thinks the technology will drive
major advances, agrees that overblown claims
are being made, but says it wont be long before
these are exposed for what they are. The hype
cant last very long because over the next five
years or so, the truth will come out in the data,
he says. If by then we are creating better drugs,
and doing it faster and cheaper, then AI will
really take off. 
Nic Fleming is a freelance science writer
based in Bristol, UK.
3 1 M AY 2 0 1 8 | VO L 5 5 7 | NAT U R E | S 5 7

 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

