A Layered Model for AI Governance
Citation
Gasser, Urs, and Virgilio A.F. Almeida. 2017. A Layered Model for AI Governance. IEEE Internet
Computing 21 (6) (November): 5862. doi:10.1109/mic.2017.4180835.

Published Version
doi:10.1109/MIC.2017.4180835

Permanent link
http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:34390353

Terms of Use
This article was downloaded from Harvard Universitys DASH repository, and is made available
under the terms and conditions applicable to Open Access Policy Articles, as set forth at http://
nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:dash.current.terms-of-use#OAP

Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you. Submit a story .
Accessibility

A Layered Model for AI Governance
Urs Gasser and Virgilio A.F. Almeida - Harvard University
AI-based systems are black boxes, resulting in massive information asymmetries
between the developers of such systems and consumers and policymakers. In
order to bridge this information gap, this article proposes a conceptual framework
for thinking about governance for AI.
Many sectors of society rapidly adopt digital technologies and big data, resulting
in the quiet and often seamless integration of AI, autonomous systems, and
algorithmic decision-making into billions of human lives[1][2]. AI and algorithmic
systems already guide a vast array of decisions in both private and public sectors.
For example, private global platforms, such as Google and Facebook, use AIbased filtering algorithms to control access to information. AI algorithms that
control self-driving cars must decide on how to weigh the safety of passengers
and pedestrians[3]. Various applications, including security and safety decisionmaking systems, rely heavily on A-based face recognition algorithms. And a
recent study from Stanford University describes an AI algorithm that can deduce
the sexuality of people on a dating site with up to 91 percent accuracy[4]. Voicing
alarm at the capabilities of AI evidenced within this study, and as AI technologies
move toward broader adoption, some voices in society have expressed concern
about the unintended consequences and potential downsides of widespread use
of these technologies.
To ensure transparency, accountability, and explainability for the AI ecosystem,
our governments, civil society, the private sector, and academia must be at the
table to discuss governance mechanisms that minimize the risks and possible
downsides of AI and autonomous systems while harnessing the full potential
of this technology[5]. Yet the process of designing a governance ecosystem for
AI, autonomous systems, and algorithms is complex for several reasons. As
researchers at the University of Oxford point out,3 separate regulation solutions
for decision-making algorithms, AI, and robotics could misinterpret legal and
ethical challenges as unrelated, which is no longer accurate in todays systems.
Algorithms, hardware, software, and data are always part of AI and autonomous
systems. To regulate ahead of time is difficult for any kind of industry. Although
AI technologies are evolving rapidly, they are still in the development stages. A
global AI governance system must be flexible enough to accommodate cultural
differences and bridge gaps across different national legal systems. While there
are many approaches we can take to design a governance structure for AI, one
option is to take inspiration from the development and evolution of governance
structures that act on the Internet environment. Thus, here we discuss different
issues associated with governance of AI systems, and introduce a conceptual
framework for thinking about governance for AI, autonomous systems, and
algorithmic decision-making processes.

1

The Nature of AI
Although AI-based applications are increasingly adopted in hospitals, court
rooms, schools, at home, and on the road to support (and in some instances,
even guide) human decision-making, currently no universally accepted definition
of AI, a term coined in the mid-1950s by US researchers[6][7]. One reason for
the lack of a definition is that AI, from a technical perspective, is not a single
technology, but rather a set of techniques and sub-disciplines ranging from areas
such as speech recognition and computer vision to attention and memory, to
name just a few[6].
From a phenomenological perspective, however, the term AI is often used as an
umbrella term to refer to a certain degree of autonomy exhibited in advanced
health diagnostic systems, next-generation digital tutors, self-driving cars, and
other A-based applications share. Often, such applications in turn impact
human behavior and evolve dynamically in ways that are at times unforeseen
by the systems designers. In this context, the differentiation between weak (or
narrow) and strong (or general) AI is often used and helpful when discussing
the nature of AI. Weak AI describes the current generation of applications that
are focused on a relatively narrow task such as playing a game, recognizing a
voice, or detecting certain patterns on a CT-scan. Strong AI, in contrast, refers
to machines with genuine intelligence and self-awareness in the sense that the
machine has the ability to apply intelligence to any problem[8]. At present, the
technical possibility and (potential) societal impact of strong AI is discussed
controversially, while the current adaptation of weak AI already leads to a series
of real governance issues that deserve attention in the present.

AI Governance Challenges
Following a typical pattern when new technologies become more widely available,
policymakers and other stakeholders are focusing largely on the risks and harms
of AI-based technologies[9]. Again, similar to previous conversations about
digital technologies impact on society, the challenges related to AI, autonomous
systems, and algorithms are often presented and discussed in the form of lists of
substantive issues (including policy, legal, governance, and ethical considerations)
that must be addressed[6].
A recent roadmap on AI policy by one leading expert, for instance, identifies the
following clusters of core issues and questions where AI applications either lead
to new challenges or amplify pre-existing policy concerns and pressure points[10]:
 Justice and equality. To what extent can AI systems be designed and
operated to reflect human values such as fairness, accountability, and
transparency and avoid (new) inequalities and biases?
 Use of force. As AI-based systems are now involved in making decisions
about the use of force  for instance, in the case of autonomous weapons 
2

how much human control is necessary or required? Who bears responsibility
for the AI-based outputs?
 Safety and certification. Particularly where AI-based systems have a
physical manifestation, how do we define and validate safety thresholds 
for instance, through standard-setting and certification?
 Privacy. As AI-systems are enabled and powered by data, what are the privacy implications and new privacy threats of next-generation technologies
 for instance, in terms of government surveillance or corporate influence
over customers?
 Displacement of labor and taxation. To what extent will AI-based machines
replace jobs previously performed by humans, or at least transform what
labor means? What are the effects of AI on public finances if robots dont
pay taxes?
Such lists of substantive issues, several others could be added, (for instance,
intellectual property or liability), can be supplemented by cross-cutting themes
surrounding transparency, accountability, and explainability; inclusion and fairness; global governance; and more that span across the different application
areas of AI-based systems (see ).

Models for AI Governance
When considering future governance models for AI that address the aforementioned issues, it might be helpful and necessary to move beyond such lists and
consider some of the larger structural challenges associated with the regulation
(broadly defined) of AI-based technologies. In the following, we highlight three
such challenges that translate into design requirements for a future governance
model of AI.
Information asymmetries. While AI has the potential to shape the lives of
billions of people, only a few experts really understand the underlying techniques. AI-based systems are often inscrutable, sometimes resulting in massive
information asymmetries between the developers of such systems and other
stakeholders, including consumers and policymakers. An effective governance
system for AI needs to incorporate mechanisms aimed at improving our collective
understanding of the AI phenomenon in its different manifestations and contexts
of application.
Finding normative consensus. The current policy and governance debate is
largely focused on risks and challenges associated with AI. But AI also offers
tremendous potential benefits to society, as the discussions about the use of AI
in the context of Sustainable Development Goals illustrate (see ). A governance
model must open up spaces for cost-benefit analyses and normative consensus
building among different stakeholders, particularly where tradeoffs are involved
in the design of AI systems. A future governance model also needs to deal
with normative differences among contexts and geographies, and provide for
3

interoperability among different frameworks and approaches[11].
Government mismatches. Even where we have a shared understanding of AI
technologies, the underlying techniques, and societal consensus about what is or
isnt desirable, the design of effective, efficient, and legitimate means (strategies,
approaches, tools, and so forth) to resolve the aforementioned substantive issues
is challenging, given the conditions of uncertainty and complexity in the AI
ecosystem. But larger undercurrents also put limits on traditional approaches to
law- and policymaking in the digital age[12].
Taken together, these structural challenges and associated design requirements for
a future governance model of AI point away from simple state-centric, commandand-control regulatory schemes toward more complex approaches to governance
emergent in fields as diverse as the Internet, nanotechnology governance, or
gene driver governance. While the exact contours of a future AI governance
model are still in flux, advanced governance models such as active matrix theory,
polycentric governance, hybrid regulation, and mesh regulation can provide both
inspiration and conceptual guidance on how such a future governance regime
might be designed[13]. In the next section, we highlight one feature that is
common across many of these models: the idea of modularity embodied in the
form of layered governance, which also combines different instruments to grapple
with and address the aforementioned substantive issues, making it a shared
responsibility among all relevant actors involved. It is important to note that any
such emerging model must be situated in and interact with existing institutional
frameworks of applicable laws and policies, particularly human rights, as the
development and deployment of AI does not take place in a vacuum[14].

The Layered Model
Modularity is one of the main mechanisms for managing complex systems.
Modularity aims to reduce the number of interdependencies that must be analyzed
by identifying which tasks are highly interdependent and which ones are not[15].
Layering represents a particular form of modularity, in which different parts
of the overall system are arranged into parallel hierarchies. A frequently cited
example of layering is the Open System Interconnection (OSI) Reference model
during the late 1970s[15]. Another example of a layered model was proposed by
David Clark[16] to represent the nature of cyberspace using a model with four
layers, that are: first, the people who participate in the cyber-experience; second,
the information that is stored, transmitted, and transformed in cyberspace;
third, the logical building blocks that make up the services, and fourth, the
physical foundations that support the logical elements. The scale, heterogeneity,
complexity, and degree of technological autonomy of AI systems require new
thinking about policy, law, and regulation. We attempt to capture the complex
nature of AI governance by using an analytical model with three layers. From
the top down, the interacting layers are as follows:

4

 social and legal;
 ethical; and
 technical foundations that support the ethical and social layers.

Figure 1: A layered model for AI governance. The interacting layers (which sit
between society and AI applications) are social and legal; ethical; and technical
foundations that support the ethical and social layers.
Figure 1 shows a representation of the layered governance model. It will sit
between society and AI applications. The instruments mapped onto the layers
can be developed at different times. In the near term, governance proposals
could concentrate on developing standards and principles for AI algorithms. For
the mid- and long-term, nation-states can work on specific legislation to regulate
mature AI applications. The model can be a helpful heuristic that illustrates
how principles, policies, norms, and laws in response to AI-based challenges and
opportunities can be combined and work together, within and across layers.
The Technical Layer
The technical layer is the foundation of the AI governance ecosystem  the
algorithms and data out of which it is built. AI systems and autonomous systems
rely on data and algorithms, regardless of whether they are physical systems (such
as self-driving cars and commercial robots) or software systems (such as criminal
justice or medical diagnostic systems, or intelligent personal assistants)[17]. A
set of principles for accountable algorithms and an associated suggested social
impact statement were developed as part of a Dagstuhl Seminar on Data,
Responsibly.[18]. The proposed principles for accountable algorithms with social
impact are as follows: responsibility, explainability, accuracy, auditability, and
fairness. The collection, use, and management of data by AI algorithms, known
as data governance, should follow principles that promote fairness and safeguard
5

against race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender, sexual orientation,
disability, or family status discrimination[19].
The Ethical Layer
On top of the technical layer, we could articulate high-level ethical concerns that
apply to all types of AI applications and systems. One important source for
the development of such ethical principles are human rights principles. Another
example of the emergence of AI ethics norms is the IEEE general principles for
AI and autonomous systems[17]. Actions driven by algorithms can be assessed
according to ethical criteria and principles. For instance, when an AI application
analyzes the data of an insurance company and charges a certain group of people
higher premiums, based on variables such as gender or age, such a decisionmaking application would be violating the ethical principle of equal or fair
treatment.
The Social and Legal Layer
The social and legal layer could address the process of creating institutions
and allocating responsibilities for regulating AI and autonomous systems. For
example, Matthew Scherer[20] describes a policymaking body that would have
the power to define AI, create exceptions allowing for AI research to be conducted
in certain environments without the researchers being subjected to strict liability,
and establish an AI certification process. One starting point for specific norms
aimed at regulating AI can be the principles and criteria that emerge from the
ethical and technical layers, in addition to pre-existing and more general national
and international legal frameworks, including human rights. The layered model
provides a framework for thinking about AI governance, aiming at the definition
of appropriate behavior for AI and autonomous systems.

END
Implementing governance structures for AI and algorithmic decision-making
systems can occur at multiple layers and involve blended approaches. Here, we
describe some of these layers, taking into consideration that some of them would
only be considered if the risk that certain AI applications present are substantial
and concrete. Governance processes can range from market-oriented solutions to
government-based structures and can be applied nationally or internationally.
On the regional level, a rich example is the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR), a wide-ranging and complex regulation intended to strengthen and
unify data protection for all individuals within the European Union (). It offers
a (limited) right to explanation that will oblige companies to explain the
purpose of an algorithm and the kind of data it uses when making automated
6

decisions[21]. Absent an AI-specific international legal framework, a global
oversight body, which can take the form of a multistakeholder committee, could
be the curator of global principles and emerging norms for AI systems.

References
1. E. Horvitz, AI, People, and Society, Science, vol 357, no. 6346, 2017,
p. 7.
2. National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology,
Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence, tech. report, Executive Office of the President, 2016.
3. S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and L. Floridi, Transparent, Explainable,
and Accoun able AI for Robotics, Science Robotics, vol. 2, no. 6, 2017;
doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aan6080.
4. S. Levin, New AI Can Guess Whether Youre Gay or Straight from a
Photograph, The Guardian, 8 Sept. 2017; .
5. I. Rahwan, Society-in-the-Loop: Programming the Algorithmic Social
Contract, Ethics and Information Technology, 2017; doi:10.1007/s10676017-9430-8.
6. P. Stone et al., Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030: One Hundred Year
Study on Artificial Intelligence, Report of the 2015 Study Panel, tech
report, Sept. 2016; .
7. J. McCarthy et al., A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research
Project on Artificial Intelligence, 31 Aug. 1955.
8. E. Kumar, Artificial Intelligence, I.K. International, 2008.
9. R. Brownsword and K. Young, eds., Regulating Technologies: Legal Futures,
Regula- tory Frames, and Technological Fixes, Hart, 2008.
10. R. Calo, Artificial Intelligence Policy: A Roadmap, Social Science Research Network (SSRN), 8 Aug. 2017; .
11. J. Palfrey and U. Gasser, Interop: The Promise and Perils of Highly
Interconected Systems, Basic Books, 2012.
12. C. Scott, Regulation in the Age of Governance: The Rise of the PostRegulatory State, The Politics of Regulation: Institutions and Regulatory
Reforms for the Age of Governance, J. Jordana and D. Levi-Faur, eds.,
Edward Elgar, 2004, pp. 145174.
13. R.H. Weber, Realizing a New Global Cyberspace Framework: Normative
Foundations and Guiding Principles, Schulthess 2014.
14. U. Gasser, AI and the Law: Setting the Stage, Medium, 26 June 2017; .
15. C.S. Yoo, Protocol Layering and Internet Policy, Faculty Scholarship
Paper 454, Univ. of Pennsylvania, 2013; .
16. D. Clark, Characterizing Cyberspace: Past, Present, and Future, MIT
CSAIL, v. 1.2, 12 Mar. 2010.
17. The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems, Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision for
Prioritizing Human Wellbeing with Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous
7

Systems (AI/AS), IEEE, 2017; .
18. S. Abiteboul et al., Data, Responsibly (Dagstuhl Seminar 16291),
Dagstuhl Reports, vol. 6, no. 7, 2016, pp 4271.
19. National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology, Big
Data: A Report on Algorithmic Systems, Opportunity, and Civil Rights,
tech. report, Executive Office of the President, 2016.
20. M. Scherer, Regulating Artificial Intelligence Systems: Risks, Challenges,
Competencies, and Strategies, Harvard J. Law & Technology, vol. 29, no.
2, 2016; .
21. S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and L. Floridi, Why a Right to Explanation of
Automated Decision-Making Does Not Exist in the General Data Protection
Regulation, Intl Data Privacy Law, 2017; .
 Urs Gasser is the executive director of the Berkman Klein Center for
Internet & Society at Harvard University, where he is co-leads the Ethics
and Governance of AI initiative, and serves as a professor of practice at
Harvard Law School. His research and teaching focus on the interplay
between law and technology. Gasser is a graduate of the University of
St. Gallen and Harvard Law School. Contact him at .
 Virgilio A.F. Almeida is a faculty associate at the Berkman Klein
Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, and a professor
in the Computer Science Department at the Federal University of Minas
Gerais (UFMG), Brazil. His research interests include cyber policies, largescale distributed systems, the Internet, and social computing. Almeida has
a PhD in computer science from Vanderbilt University. Contact him at or
.

8

