Economic Growth and Automation Risks in Developing
Countries Due to the Transition Toward Digital Modernity
Aki Nagano
Kyoto city
Japan
ngnak2017@gmail.com

ABSTRACT1
ACM Reference format:

This paper is aimed at making recommendations to establish a
stewardship to embody the responsibilities and morality that
will prevent the automation risks faced by Least Development
Countries (LDCs) due to transition toward digital modernity.
Recent studies reveal that law qualified individuals in developed
countries will face the risks of jobs that are highly subject to
automation. This indicates that corresponding risks will be seen
in LDCs. The rise of digitalization may override developing
country's opportunities to elevate itself from a low-income
country to a middle or high-income country. In the aftermath
of World War , western society tried to support LDCs in
maintain the principles of a free world system and contribute to
reducing poverty through market oriented development. Since
the end of Cold War, defense of the free world has lost its
significance but economy is getting more important political
instrument. Advancement of automation technologies might
aggravate opportunities for developing country's economic
growth and international society needs the alternative
principles.

A. Nagano. 2018. Economic Growth and Automation Risks in
Developing Countries Due to the Transition Toward Digital Modernity.
In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Theory and Practice
of Electronic Governance, Galway, Ireland, April 2018 (ICEGOV18), 9
pages.
DOI: 10.1145/3209415.3209442

1 INTRODUCTION
The transition toward digital modernity with the fourth
industrial revolution will provide huge benefits to our society.
These benefits can potentially change industry, business,
people's lifestyles, the education system, and so on. However,
the negative factors of the revolution, such as unemployment
risks and gender problems, have also been reported [1-5].
Solutions such as the introduction of a basic income, short-term
labor, a robotics tax, educational improvements, etc. are being
actively debated on various media such as the Internet,
newspaper, SNS, and in academia. However, these are mainly
the preserve of advanced countries, which have the ability to
deal with the risks of digitalization and the automation.
Although developing countries will be subject to the damages,
effective countermeasures are not apparent yet. In addition, the
fourth industrial revolution will have an impact on the
economic development typically the East and Southeast Asian
economic model. This is also a critical issue for the field of
international aid because East and Southeast Asian economic
growth have contributed remarkably to the reduction in
poverty. The transition toward the fourth industrial revolution
may have meant that the LDCs have lost the opportunities to
break out of the vicious cycle of poverty. It is necessary for the
international community to take responsibility for the issue.
The aim of this paper is to make recommendations to establish
a stewardship to embody the responsibilities and morality that
will prevent the automation risks faced by LDCs.

CCS CONCEPTS
 Social and professional topics  Computing and
business; employment issues, automation, economic impact 
Applied computing  Law, Social, and Behavioral
Science; Economics, Sociology

KEYWORDS
development economy, automation risks, stewardship,
transition studies, global governance, digital modernity

1

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Permissions@acm.org.

ICEGOV '18, April 46, 2018, Galway, Ireland
 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5421-9/18/04$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209415.3209442

42

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

A. Nagano

This study begins by briefly summarizing previous research
focusing on the risks in the era of the fourth industrial
revolution. In the third section, it describes the characteristics
of the regional exports and the fourth section examines how
economic growth contributed to poverty reduction in East and
Southeast Asian economies and addresses the background
factors of their economic growth and political relationship to
Western foreign policy and ends with a brief discussion of the
responsibilities of the international community for developing
countries regarding the risks of digitalization and automationrelated issues.

the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership (AMP) between
government, universities, and enterprises in 2011. The aim of
AMP is to create middle class jobs and economic growth
through strengthening the manufacturing sectors and
innovations [11]; China established "Made in China 2050",
which consists of strategies to upgrade Chinese manufacturing
industry. The aims are industrial structural adjustment,
improvement in labor productivity, innovation-oriented
organization formation, progress in industrialization and
information conversion, and producing eco-products and
environmentally friendly production processes [12]; the EU
established the project "Action Plan T " and suggested a
roadmap for manufacturing 2.0 under the European
Commission's EU2020 strategy. The aim is to promote a better
use of information and communication technology (ICT) for
manufacturing [13]. The action plan involves the five R&D
research clusters, namely, agile manufacturing systems and
processes, seamless factory lifecycle management, customers
in-the loop, people at the forefront, and collaborative supply
network [13]; In England, catapult centers play a key role in
promoting innovations. According to Innovate UK, there are 11
catapult centers, which are cell and gene therapy, compound
semiconductor applications, digital, energy system, future
cities, high value manufacturing, medicine discovery, off shore
renewable energy, precision medicine, satellite applications,
and transport system [14]. These are designed to transfer
academic achievements into commercial success by promoting
economic growth [15]; The French government has promoted
the project, "Industry of the Future", which aims to see all
companies modernize their production bases and use digital
technologies to transform the business model [16]; In Japan, the
strategy for the fourth industrial revolution is related to the
"Japan revitalization strategies 2016", " new robot strategies"
and "Society 5.0". The aims are to enforce economic growth [17].
At the same time, as Japanese society faces issues in longevity,
low birth rate, and a decreasingly productive aging population,
the usages of robotics are expected to deal with these issues
[18].
Most government's strategies for the fourth industrial
revolution are likely to lie in the public private partnerships,
where technological innovations are anchored in private firms.
Global digital companies especially such as Google, Microsoft,
APPLE, IBM and Amazons have been leaders in technological
innovations and developed autonomous vehicles, Artificial
Intelligence, humanized robots and biological engineering, etc.
Based on fully funded capitals and human resources, they have
also invested in start-up companies, universities, and research
institutions, and acqui-hire them. The role of the private sector
is becoming important in the fourth industrial revolution.
The fourth industrial revolution is the ongoing technological
revolution. Table 1 presents the Schwab's definition of the
fourth industrial revolution as physical (autonomous vehicles,
3D printing, robotics), digital (the Internet of Things, Artificial
Intelligence, sensors, VR, Bitcoin, block chain), and biological
(human genome, IPS cell tissue engineering, synthetic biology,
gene editing, CRISPR)[3]. These clusters are deeply interrelated

2 RISKS IN THE ERA OF THE FOURTH
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Human society has experienced three industrial revolutions.
The first industrial revolution occurred in England from the
1750s to the 1870s. The mechanization of water and the steam
engine promoted efficiencies of production and contributed to
the trilateral trade under colonization. The second industrial
revolution occurred from 1945 to the mid-1970s. At this time,
world hegemony shifted from the European countries to the
United States. A new production system called "Taylorism" was
invented. It also symbolized mass production and intensive
labor. The other driving forces during this era were internal
combustion engines, telephones, home appliances, and electric
energy. They dramatically changed people's life styles. During
the 1970s to 1990s, the so-called "computation age" began.
Electronics and IT were critical in manufacturing systems. This
phase also witnessed the end of the Cold War, which
significantly affected the political and economic landscape
globally. It is obvious that the history of industrial revolutions
has been accompanied by the beginning of world trade and the
rise of globalization from the very start. Moreover, from the
first industrial revolution to the third industrial revolution, the
economy periodically underwent repeated convergence and
divergence and was not able to sustain stable economic growth.
Gordon (2015) explained this based on the theory that great
innovations consist of original inventions and subsidiary
subinventions where original inventions are seeds for
subinventions [6]. These corresponded to the economic cycle,
and economic growth only continued until it reached the end of
improvement subinventions. If that is so, when is the beginning
of the next industrial revolution? Brynjolfsson et al. (2011, 2014)
pointed out that 2006 was an initial year for " the second
machine age", in which computer performance reached a
different dimension caused by exponential technological
progress following Moore's Law[7-8]. This indicates that the
fourth industrial revolution has already begun.
In 2011, the German government started the project known as
"Industry 4.0". The vision is to increase the digitization of
production [9] and promote cyber physical systems. The aim is
that a German industrial standard will lead to control of global
manufacturing systems. Industry 4.0 is ushering in a fourth
industrial revolution [10]. In other countries, various national
projects are being conducted: the US administration launched

43

Economic Growth and Automation Risks in Developing
Countries Due to the Transition Toward Digital Modernity

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland
on are expanding. In a biological field, the human genome, IPS
cell tissue engineering, synthetic biology, and gene editing will
contribute to the treatment of intractable diseases. For example,
CRISPR is a gene editing technology[23]. Using this technique,
many researchers have conducted research on the repairing
genetic mutations causing blindness, inhibiting the
proliferation of cancer cells, and creating cells that are resistant
to infection, making wheat tolerant of fungi-causing disease,
and so on [24]. Another application is living modified
organisms. OXITEC is used in the gene engineering to control
transmitting insects [25]. The commercial uses are expanding.
The induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell is mainly used to
regenerate medicine for organs and tissues [26]. Combining
multiple technologies is also effective for use in biological
innovations. For example, a group of researchers at Kyoto
University and Samgamo conducted genetic treatment methods
for serious diseases such as muscular dystrophy and AIDs based
on the usages of CRISPR, iPS, and cell transplantation
techniques [24].
However, there are both good and bad sides to these
development, especially with technological innovations in
manufacturing and the service sector. Frey and Osborne (2013)
investigated the automation of job risks based on the
occupation-based approach [1]. They estimated that about 47 %
of total U.S employment is at risk [1]. Following Frey and
Osborne's work, the OECD applied a task-based approach to
analyze the "automatability" of jobs and estimated that on
average across the 21 OECD countries 9 % of labor force are at
risk of jobs [2]. The results showed that the risks of automation
in the 21 OECD countries are much lower than the results in
Frey and Osborne's occupation-based study [2]. However, the
occupation risks vary from country to country. Differences
between countries may reflect general differences in workplace
organization, difference in previous investments into
automation technologies and differences in the education of
workers across countries [2]. The report concluded that it is
mostly poorly qualified individuals who face a high risk.
Concerns regarding the automation and associated job risks
have been seen repeatedly when a society faced with emerging
technologies. In the first industrial revolution, the Luddite
movements undertook destructive behavior against capitalists
and engineers. Clark (2007) analyzed how the first industrial
revolution had an impact on England society and clarified how
social equalization and conciliation between different social
positions were improved because of the industrial revolution,
but the wage gap was significantly increased [27]. For
economists, the Luddite movement was known as the "fallacy
of Luddite" and the advanced technologies were acknowledged
to be creators of employments and contributors to economic
growth. However, from the side of business management, Ford
(2009, 2015) concerns with the recent advancement of
technologies that created the threats of automation and
associated job risks [4-5]. In addition, the US government
published the report of " Preparing for the Future of Artificial
Intelligence" an analysis by the White House Council of

to create various technological benefits based on their progress
and associated discoveries [3]. The technological advancements
will confer tremendous benefits.
Table 1: Three clusters of the fourth industrial
revolution modified by Schwab (2016) [3]
Physical
Autonomous
vehicles
3D printing
Advanced
robotics
New materials

Digital
Internet of
Things
Artificial
Intelligence

Biological
Human Genome
project
IPS Cell tissue
engineering

Sensors

Synthetic biology
Gene editing
CRISPR

VR
block chain

For example, autonomous vehicles will create safe and secure
transportation systems. 3D printing is appropriate for
producing intricate three-dimensional objects and mainly used
for creating prototypes in various sectors, such as
manufacturing, medicine, art, aerospace, household uses, and so
on. The progress of robotics has also been obtained through
remarkable innovation. For example, Baxter produced by
Rethink Robotics is known for its progressiveness and
uniqueness. The key characteristic of Baxter is that it is
designed to move its body based on training not for
programming [19]. HAL produced by Cyberdyne is another
type of robot. It is a cyborg robot merging functions between
the machine, human body, and information [20] and it mainly
works as a personal assistants. Rumba produced by irobot is also
categorized as a human assistant [21]. It is a home appliance
that works as an automated cleaner. Nano robot works in the
medical fields and investigates inside of the body. It is an
autonomous machine, which at the scale of 10-9 meters can
diagnose and treat human diseases at the cellular level [22]. In
the cluster of the digital technologies, the progress of the
Internet of Things (IoT) is remarkable. It has defined the
ubiquitous system whereby various things are networked and
receive information through sensors and control signals.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is defined as a system that artificially
recreates the functions of the human brain and nerve system
such as memory, inference, judgment, learning, etc. It is
substantially identical to operate human brain. Nowadays, AI is
widely used in the products such as drones, autonomous cars,
robots, and so on. When used in combination with IoT, AI and
robotics especially can exert positive effects. The next notable
innovation is the block chain. It is a digitally distributed ledger,
which is verified through a cryptographic private key [22]. Its
initial purpose was to provide a secure digitalized transferring
system for the Bit-coin. However, applications such as voting
systems, organizational management, trading, copyright
protection, banking, accounting, authentication systems and so

44

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

A. Nagano
[29]. East Asia excluding China ranks as fourth. East Asia
including China has the fifth score but there is a little difference
between third and fifth. The lowest score foes to South Asian
countries namely Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka, where
the score is 53.51 in 1990 and 50.68 in 2000 [29]. South Asia
including India is ranked second from the bottom.
The results show that all developing regions have lower
sophistication scores, compared with the two highly
industrialized regions, North America and Western Europe.
Moreover, the results also indicate that the automation risks in
developing regions are higher than those of the developed
countries because of their less sophisticated levels of
industrialization. South Asia excluding India faces the highest
automation risks. In the next section, the Asian economic status
quo is described in more detail.

Economic Advisors (CEA) [28]. The report noted that the
negative effect of automation job risks will impact on lowerwage jobs, and also that AI-driven automation will increase the
wage gap between less-educated and more- educated workers
[28]. Although the CEA's report suggests that AI and machine
learning have the potential to improve people's standard of
living, the CEA's negative statements will have certain impacts
on our society. Even though these studies are an analysis of
developed countries, the results indicate that the corresponding
automation risks would be seen in developing countries. The
next section addresses the reasons why automation issues are
related to economic growth in LDCs. the regional
characteristics of the industrial structure through a comparison
of the level of sophistication of exports.

3 REGIONAL SOPHISTICATION OF
EXPORTS

4 TRAJECTORIES OF THE EAST AND
SOUTHEAST ASIAN ECONOMY

Lall et al., (2005) developed a method of classifying exports
based on their level of technology and level of sophistication.
The technology level is defined as the Research and
Development intensity of the core industrial process and the
sophistication level is based on the average income of the
exporter of a product [29]. Because of a web of complex
globalized networks, developing countries are taking part in
assembling high-tech products. They are not simply classified a
high-tech products, which reflect higher skill and technologies.

4.1 Trajectory of the economic development
Since the 1960s, four waves of economic growth have been seen
in Eastern Asia [30]. The first wave started in Japan. The
Japanese government prioritized economic growth during the
re-construction period following the end of World War  and
achieved rapid urbanization and industrialization during the
1960s and 1970s. Following Japan, the so-called newly
industrializing economies (NIEs) of Asia, which consists of
South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore, emerged as a
second wave around the 1980s. The third wave came from the
ASEAN countries such as Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia. In
the fourth wave, China and Vietnam have achieved rapid
economic growth since the 1990s.
Figure 1 presented the GDP growth rates from 1960 to 2016 in
selected Asian countries based on the data provided from World
Bank [31]. Figure 1 shows the influences of the Asian currency
crisis in 1998 and the world financial crisis of 2007-2008 clearly.
Moreover, China and India present remarkable achievement
and have become a driving force for world economic growth
over a decade. The economic growth rate in China and India
from 2000 to 2016 is 9.42% and 7.08% respectively [31].
According to the World Bank report (2017), China established a
strategy for the industrial structural adjustment, which means
China gradually shifted from the labor-intensive industry to
high tech industry [32]. As a background to these changes,
Chinese manufacturing wages rose by 281 % from 2003 to 2010
[32]. Also, this implies the Chinese markets matured from
production to consumption.
As East and Southeast Asian economy grows, extreme
poverty rates have improved remarkably. According to the
Millennium Development Goals report of 2015, the extreme
poverty rate in Eastern Asia was reduced from 61% in 1990 to
only 4% in 2015 [33]. The rates in South-Eastern Asia reduced
from 52% to 17%. In addition, the proportion of people in
vulnerable employment in East Asia has dropped from 71.2 % in
1991 to 39.6% in 2015 [33].

Table 2: Regional sophistication of exports [29]
Region

1990

2000

N America

84.06

74.47

W Europe

80.86

71.88

LAC1(including Mexico)

69.14

64.91

E Asia2 (excluding PRC)

69.95

64.83

E Asia1 (including PRC)

69.18

62.78

LAC2 (excluding Mexico)

65.87

61.28

SSA1(including South Africa)

NA

59.55

SSA2(excluding South Africa)

59.17

55.93

MENA

62.60

55.72

S Asia1(including India)

58.53

50.68

S Asia2(excluding India)

53.51

39.73

Notes: There is no export data for South Africa for 1990. South Asian data for 2000
includes exports data for 2001 for Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, which are missing
2000 data.

Table 2 shows the results of Lall and associate (2005)
investigation of export sophistication scores by region in 1990
and 2000. Although the score decreases from 84.06 in 1990 and
71.88 in 2000, North America has the most sophisticated
industrial structure [29]. The second highest score is in Western
Europe, which gained a score of 80.86 in 1990 and 71.88 in 2000

45

Economic Growth and Automation Risks in Developing
Countries Due to the Transition Toward Digital Modernity

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

Figure 1 The GDP growth rate (annual %) in selected Asian countries

25
20
15
10
5

19
61
19
63
19
65
19
67
19
69
19
71
19
73
19
75
19
77
19
79
19
81
19
83
19
85
19
87
19
89
19
91
19
93
19
95
19
97
19
99
20
01
20
03
20
05
20
07
20
09
20
11
20
13
20
15

0
-5

-10
-15
JPN

KOR

SGP

IDN

THA

CHN

Data source: World Bank [31]

Among them, Bangladesh is one of the countries improved the
living standards. Bangladesh recognized as an LDC since
Bangladesh became independent from Pakistan in 1971 and
received international aid for a long time. The World Bank
reported Bangladesh, Kenya, Myanmar, and Tajikistan have
become lower-middle income countries [34]. This indicates that
their range of annual income has been upgraded from $1,046 to
$4,125 [34]. According to the competitive industrial
performance index of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO), Bangladesh's ranking has
improved comparatively from the 102nd place in 1990 to the
77th place in 2015, although the top five manufacturing sectors
still consist of low-tech industries: wearing apparel (35.5%),
textile (14.1%), basic metals (13.3%), food and beverages (12.0%),
and non- metallic mineral products (7.1%)[35]. Fujita (2005)
noted that the driving force of economic growth in Bangladesh
depended mainly on the manufacturing sector but improvement
of agricultural productivity played a basic role in the progress
[36]. The main reasons were that as the food self-sufficiency rate
rose, it became no longer anxious to eat, and as food imports
from foreign countries decreased, it became possible to invest
the surplus capital for domestic investment [36]. In addition,
microcredit, in which the Grameen Bank developed provision
of small secure loans as an instrument for poverty reduction,
improved the ability of poor women in agricultural
communities to manage their households [37]. It is an obvious
fact that the market economy enhanced people's living
standards; however, there is criticism of the problems that arise
in a way of economic development because of the

contradictions of poverty controls applied economic instrument
and promoting market economy under the globalization.
Collier (2007) noted that economic growth usually does benefits
ordinary people and it is exceptional if only some people enjoy
the benefits of economic growth [38]. It is controversial but we
need to recognize what benefits economic growth has brought
people. In addition, the digitalization technologies might
aggravate the opportunities to get out from the low-income
country as typified by Bangladesh.

4.2 Background factors for the success of the
East and Southeast Asian economies
There is a question about how the East and Southeast Asian
economy have been successful. To elucidate the mechanism of
East Asian economic growth attracted attention as a research
theme of many researchers in various fields. The World Bank
(1993) reported that East Asian economic growth relied on
foreign investment as a springboard for economic development
and promoted expanding export opportunities [39]. Also the
report pointed out that the effective use of prominent natural
resources and human capital contributed to economic growth
[39]. Krugman (1994) explained that the background factors
contributing to East Asian economic growth were a high saving
rate, forced labor migration from rural to urban areas, high
educational attainment, and investment in physical capital [40].
On the other hand, Collier (2007) noted the importance of
bureaucracy and political stability as contributors for Asian
economic development [38]. For example, the people in the

46

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

A. Nagano

Philippines have a high level of education but their economy is
still stagnant owing to the unstable political situation. Moreover,
he added that institutional corruption would be regarded as the
major factor obstructing the economic growth and effective
bureaucratic organizations that are necessary for the economy
to operate efficiency. Johnson (1982) focused on the role of
bureaucracy in Japanese industrial policy, especially with
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and
analyzed the mechanism of MITI from the viewpoint of history
and organization [41]. Japan's industrial policy had major
influence on some other Asian countries. Perkins (2013)
explained the Asian economic growth based on the perspectives
of cultural foundation, role of government, industrial and
agricultural policies [42]. Another distinctive factor is regional
economic integration in the goods sector. As a sequel of the
report in 1993, the World Bank (2007) published "An East Asian
Renaissance" and noted regionalization is a key to explain trade,
finance, and innovation accelerating within East Asia since the
late 1990s [43]. Okamoto (2005) noted that intra-industrial trade
within the open trade system in ASEAN contributed to the
regional economic connection and economic growth [44]. For
example, Viet Nam enjoys a high level of foreign investments
and receives benefits from entering the global value chain;
meanwhile, Cambodia and Laos have failed to catch up [44].

society is entering a transition period between industrial
modernity and digital modernity. Beck et al. (1994) noted that
the last transition was from traditional modernity to industrial
modernity. In this process, the modern society is undercutting
its formation of class, stratum, occupation, sex roles, nuclear
family, plants, business sectors and forms of natural technoeconomic progress [45]. In addition, the side effects have seen
as environmental deterioration caused by firms' pollution
emissions and many victims suffered from pollution-related
diseases. Developing countries in the middle of industrialization
are still suffering from pollution emissions. Beck noted that
these are the destructions that allow advancement to the next
step, and then, the reconstructions for the new structural
formation start in the next phase. This process is defined
"reflexive modernization"[45] and referred to the advent of risk
society [46]. The same is predicted for the transition toward the
digital modernization. In the course of digital modernization,
the side effects will induce both social and economic destruction
of which jobless risks related to the digital technologies are one
example.

5.2 The Dilemma for Globalization
The trajectory of East and Southeast Asian development was
deeply related to Western diplomatic policies, especially during
the Cold War period. In the aftermath of World War , the
United States led the way to an extraordinary achievement in
the world order based on a sense of responsibility, strategies to
promote state power, and moral universalism for freedom and
democracy [47]. In addition, the United States promised
prosperity and freedom to the countries that belonged to the
Western Bloc in order to maintain a liberal system. During the
postwar reconstruction period, the Marshall plan was
successfully introduced to rebuild the Europe as well as
strengthen United States, militarily, economically, and
politically [48]; under the Bretton Woods Agreement, several
international economic institutions such as IMF and World
Bank were established to stabilize the world economy.
Moreover, international aid efforts were targeted at the
expansion of democracy, and encouraging independence from
colonial occupation. Indeed, Western society tried to support
developing countries to prevent them from being incorporated
into the communist orbit through free world trade. During the
1960s, "Taylorism" was a main engine for the capitalist society
and also a showcase for a prosperous lifestyle, supported by
mass production and mass consumption. At the same time,
liberalization was a basic principle and direction for the postwar
institutional framework regulating global trade and financial
activities [49]. The General Agreement on Tariff and Trade
(GATT) made progress in the liberalization of trade because
protectionism was thought to be one of the factors that caused
World War . In addition, free trade agreements, namely
NAFTA, ASEAN, APEC, MERCOSUR were negotiated through
multinational cooperation and concluded as international
conventions, and promoted the expansion of world economy.
As described above, the success of the East and Southeast Asia's

5 MOVE TOWARD DIGITAL MODERNITY
AND
ESTABLISHMENT
OF
NEW
INTERNATIONAL PRINCIPLES
5.1 Transition from Industrial Modernity to
Digital Modernity
What did digital technologies bring to our sight so far? For
instance, they are able to duplicate products without loss of
quality. We have already seen this through streaming services
for music, movies, and books. IoT is shape-shifting the products
and nature of electronic appliances. Its influences range from
commodities (smart phone, smart watch, autonomous vehicle,
etc.) to built environment (smart houses and smart buildings)
and infrastructure (smart cities). AI has already become an
influential player in our society and it is no longer merely
science fiction. We use AI in everyday life, such as the Apple
Siri, Amazon Echo, Google Home, etc. These products allow us
to feel the future and promote AI as a pleasant neo-futuristic
technology. Moreover, digital technologies will step into a new
realm. For example, the characteristics of block chain are
credibility, transparency, and openness. It is therefore used to
transfer Bit coins, but another face of block chain is it has
abilities to wipe out the inter-mediators in either the public or
private sectors. If block chain technology is applied to the
private sector, organizational work will be more pared down
and efficient. This will impact on the structural reform. As just
described, the digital technologies are developing rapidly and
pervading every aspect of our lives in unexpected ways.
Moreover, the promotions of IoT, AI, block chain, etc. have huge
potentials to change human work roles. These imply that our

47

Economic Growth and Automation Risks in Developing
Countries Due to the Transition Toward Digital Modernity

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

economies depended greatly on the establishment of networks
of free trade agreements. A policy of openness removed the
trade barriers and promoted circulation of economic inputs and
outputs at the regional level and also contributed to poverty
reduction through economic prosperity. However, recent
studies have pointed out the adverse effects of the free trade
system under the globalization, by examining how such
globalization promoted economic disparity for a long time.
Stiglitz (2002) described that although globalization has
contributed to improve the poverty reduction and living
standards for people in developing countries, some trade rules
set by international institutions, which authorize globalization,
have many disadvantages to developing countries and lead to
the economic disparity [50].

developed countries, which accumulated through the long-term
international aid.
International society needs to establish a form of a
stewardship and principles to embody the responsibilities and
morality that can ensure poverty reduction as well as
preventing automation risks for developing countries. This
study also suggests that the next principle is not just speculation
on the part of the West bloc alone; it is better to begin with a
first step that allows both developed and developing countries
to decide the future through meaningful discussion about
principles. Moreover, it is necessity for our society to establish
new international rules for mitigating negative effects of the
digitalization in order to reduce economic disparity.

6 CONCLUSIONS

5.3 Coexistence and A New framework for
International Principles

Our society is facing a transition period from industrial
modernity to digital modernity. The digital technology is
changing our society and occurring rapidly in unforeseen ways.
During this period, the changes may be inevitable and
unexpected side effects may occur in the near future. A review
of the literature suggests that in developing countries, law
qualified individuals in developed countries will face the risks
of jobs that may be highly subject to automation. This might be
a side effect of the transition toward digitalization. In addition,
corresponding risks will be seen in developing countries
because of their less sophisticated levels of industrialization.
The rise of automation and digitalization might take over the
developing country's opportunities to elevate from low-income
country to middle or high-income country. To take the case of
Bangladesh as an example, it took a long time to become a
lower-middle income country. There were several factors that
contributed to Bangladesh's economic success such as
increasing self-sufficiency in food, international aid,
educational attainment, and microcredit, but the factor that
contributed the most was manufacturing. Other East and South
East Asian countries are the same as Bangladesh. Also,
manufacturing will no longer provide the same dual benefits of
productivity gains and job creation for the low skilled labor [32].
Moreover, the fourth industrial revolution will lead to
reinforcing of the economic disparity between nations.
In the aftermath of World War , western society tried to
support developing countries in maintaining the principles of a
free world system based on the political and economic intention.
East and Southeast Asia is one of them. Previous study showed
that the success of East and Southeast Asia's economy related
to various factors. Among them, foreign investment, program
of tariff cuts, and import liberalization are specifically
supported by the principle of maintaining free world and played
critical roles for the economic development. East and Southeast
Asian countries would not have received such sufficient aids
unless it was a Cold War period. However, defense of the free
world has lost its significance since the end of the Cold War. On
the other hand, economy is becoming more important political
instrument for enhancing interdependency. Although our

It is assumed that all goods and services that both developed
country and developing countries have produced will be
replaced by automation and will no longer function like current
manufacturing; this might make it difficult to sustain the
current trade system.
Since the solutions for developed countries have been
discussed widely, this study especially focuses on the problems
for developing countries; one is to return to an economic system
that imposes high tariffs and restores protectionism as in the
past; the second is to introduce a global level taxation system
such as global consumer tax, global robotics tax, global
corporate tax, and so on, collected from the technological
advanced countries to distribute to developing countries. It is
hard to introduce the former solution because perfect closed
system will be difficult realized and history taught us prewar
protectionism created the vicious economic circle and became
one of the factors in causing World War. The latter one is
applicable but it must obtain all parties agreement. They are
only hypothetical solutions given the current situation. Even so
it is critical for our society to provide alternative principles by
which to co-operate on the North-South problem. Also, the
principles have to be endowed with the sharing value between
developing and developed countries [51-52]. In the aftermath of
the World War , western society tried to support developing
countries by maintaining the principle of a free world system,
which contributed to poverty reduction through socioeconomic
development based on a policy of openness. With the end of the
Cold War, defense of the free world has lost its significance but
economy is getting more important political instrument to
stabilize bilateral relations. In todays powers, important
consideration is internal economic and social development than
external conquest [48]. In addition, internal development
requires not only external stability but also relationships that
contribute to economic development [48]. However,
advancement of automation technologies might aggravate
opportunities for developing country and, as a result, they
might affect interdependency between developing and

48

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

A. Nagano

society enjoys the benefits brought on by globalization,
reflecting on advancing globalization shows a contradiction, as
it led to economic disparity and caused serious social damages
in the developing world. We need to introduce alternative
principles for developing countries to solve the digitalization
problems. It is necessary to avoid the situation where human
beings work below the cost in order to maintain robots.
Multilateral economic relationships have become stronger than
before, and have also been imbued with politically and socially
important meaning. Moreover, both developing and developed
countries need to share their values through meaningful
discussion and change their rules and principles to be more
adaptive in the transition to digital modernity. This study
suggests that international society establish a stewardship that
will embody the responsibilities and morality necessary to
prevent the risks of automation faced by developing countries.

[20] Cyberdyne. HAL. https://www.cyberdyne.jp
[21] irobot. http://www.irobot.com
[22] Ross Alec. 2017. The Industries of The Future. Simon & Schuster. New York,
London, Toronto, Sydney, New Delhi.
[23] The Doudna Lab. http://rna.berkeley.edu/crispr.html
[24] Kobayashi, Masakazu., Genome henshutohananika: DNA nomesu CRISPR
no Shogeki, Kodanshagendaishinsho. (printed in Japanese)
[25] OXITEC, http://www.oxitec.com.
[26] Center for iPS cell research and application, Kyoto University,
http://www.cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp/e/index.html
[27] Clark, Gregory. 2008. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the
World. Princeton University Press.
[28] Executive office of the President National Science and Technology Council
committee on Technology. 2016. Preparing for the Future of Artificial
Intelligence.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/whitehouse_files/
microsites/ostp/NSTC/preparing_for_the_future_of_ai.pdf
[29] Sanjaya Lall, John Weiss and Jinkang Zhang. 2005. The Sophistication of
Exports: A New Measure of Product Characteristics. ADB Institute
Discussion Paper No.23. 1-28. DOI:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/156775/
adbi-dp23.pdf
[30] Hiroshi Oikawa. 2000. Asia's Keisai Hatten to Nihon. Kazuhiro Igawa.
Masayuki Hayashibara. Msao Satake. Kouji Aoki (Eds.). Kokusaikeizaigaku.
Chuo Keizai sha, Tokyo, Japan. (printed in Japanese)
[31] The World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org
[32] The World Bank. Trouble in the MAKING? The future of manufacturing -led
development. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/competitiveness/
publication/trouble-in-the-making-the-future-of-manufacturing-leddevelopment
[33] United Nations Millennium Development Goals 2015 . DOI: http://
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2015_MDG_Report/pdf/backgrounders/MDG
%202015%20PR%20Bg%20Asia.pdf
[34] The World Bank http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/pressrelease/2015/07/01/new-world-bank-update-shows-bangladesh-kenyamyanmar-and-tajikistan-as-middle-income-while-south-sudan-falls-backto-low-income
[35] United Nations Industrial Development Organization, UNIDO Statistical
Data Portal. DOI: http://stat.unido.org/country-profile/economics/BGD.
[36] Koichi Fujita. 2005. Bangladesh Nousonkaihatsu no nakano Kaisohendo.
Kyoto University Press, Kyoto, Japan. (printed in Japanese)
[37] Grameen bank. http://www.grameen.com
[38] Paul Collier. 2007. The Bottom Billion: Why the poorest countries are failing
and what can be done about it. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
[39] The World Bank. The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public
Policy - A The World Bank Policy for Research Report. Oxford University,
Oxford, UK.
[40] Paul Krugman. 1994. The Myth of Asia's Miracle. Foreign Affairs, 73, 6, 6278.
[41] Chalmers Johnson. 1982. MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of
Industrial Policy, 1925-1975. Stanford University Press, United States.
[42] Dwight H. Perkins. 2013. East Asian Development: Foundations and
Strategies. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, London.
[43] Deepak Bhattasaki. Milan Brahmbhatt. Gaurav Datt. Mona Haddad. Edward
Mountfield. Radu Tatucu. Ekaterina Vostroknutova 2007. An East Asian
Renaissance: Ideas for Economic Growth. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank, Washington D.C,
United States
[44] Yumiko Okamoto. 2005. Emergence of the Intra-Mediate Trade: Implications
for the Asia-Pacific Region. Paper presented at the East-West center and the
Rosenberg Institute of Global Finance Brandeis University. DOI:
www.eastwestcenter.org/fileadmin/.../ PAFTAD_30 _Okamoto.pdf
[45] Beck, Ulrich., Giddens, A. and Lash, S. 1994. Reflexive modernization:
politics, tradition and aesthetics in the modern social order. Polity Press.
UK. or responsible innovation. Research Policy, 42, 1568-1580.
[46] Beck, Ulrich. 1992. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, Sage
Publications. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi.
[47] Henry Kisshinger. 2015. World Order. Penguin Books, New York, United
States.
[48] Richard Haass. 2017. A World in Disarray: American Foreign Policy and the
Crisis of the Old Order. Penguin Press, New York, United States.
[49] Satoshi Ikeda. 1996. World Production. Terence K. Hopkins and Immanuel
Wallerstein (Eds.). The Age of Transition. Zed Books, London, UK .
[50] Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2003. Globalization and its discontents. Penguin, New
York, United States.
[51] P. Macnaghten, R. Owen, J. stilgoe, B. Wynne, A. Azevedo, A. de Campos, J.
Chilvers, R. Dagnino, G. di Giulio, E. Frow, B. Garvey, C. Groves, S. Hartley,
M. Knobel, E. Kobayashi, M. Lehtonen, J. Lezaun, L. Mello, M. Monteiro, J.

REFERENCES
[1] Frey C. Benedikt and Michael A. Osborne. 2013. The Future of Employment:
How Susceptible are Jobs to Computerization?. Oxford Martin program on
technology and employment. DOI:
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads /academic
/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf
[2] Arntz, M. and Gregory, T. 2016. The Risk of Automation for Jobs in OECD
Countries: A Comparative Analysis", OECD Social, Employment and
Migration Working Papers, No. 189, OECD Publishing, Paris.
[3] Klaus Schwab. 2016. The Fourth Industrial Revolution. World Economic
Forum, Geneva, Switzerland.
[4] Ford Martin. 2015. The Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of
Mass Unemployment. Oneworld publications.
[5] Ford Martin. 2009. The Lights in the Tunnel: Automation, Accelerating
technology and the Economy of Future. Accurant Publish.
[6] Gordon, J. R. 2016. The rise and fall of American growth: The U.S standard
living since the civil war, Princeton University. Princeton, Oxford.
[7] Brynjolfsson Erick. and McAfee Andrew. 2011. Race Against the Machine.
How the digital revolution is accelerating innovation, driving
productivities, and irreversibly transforming employment and the economy,
Digital Frontier Press.
[8] Brynjolfsson Erick. and McAfee Andrew. 2014. The Second Machine Age:
Work, Machine, and Prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies. W.W.
Norton & Co Inc., New York, London.
[9] Buhr D. Social Innovation Policy for Industry 4.0. FRIEDRICH EBERT
STIFTUNG . www.fes-2017plus.de.
[10] The Industrie 4.0 Working Group. 2013. Recommendations for
implementing the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0.
http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_Website
/Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/Final_report__I
ndustrie_4.0_accessible.pdf
[11] Whitehouse https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2011/
06/24/president-obama-launches-advanced-manufacturing-partnership
[12] Jin, Jianmine. Reading "Made in China 2050" strategy for advancing Chinese
industries. http://www.fujitsu.com/jp/group/fri/en/economic/publications/
report/2017/report-440.html
[13] ICT for manufacturing: Action plan T roadmap for manufacturing 2.0.
https://setis.ec.europa.eu/energy-research/sites/default/files/staticprojects/files/roadmap.pdf
[14] innovate UK. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/631065/17.3172_Innovate_UK_Annual_Report_and_Ac
counts_2016_to_2017.pdf
[15] British Embassy Tokyo, department for International trade. 2016.
Innovation is Grete. Britain & Northern Ireland. " The latest trends of IoT in
England".
Rethink robotics. http://www.rethinkrobotics.com/videos/
[16] Industry of Future.
https://www.economie.gouv.fr/files/files/PDF/pk_industry-of-future.pdf.
[17] Growth strategy 2017. https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/keizaisaisei/
kettei.html
[18] New robot strategy. https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/keizaisaisei/pdf/
robot_honbun_150210EN.pdf
[19] Rethink Robotics. http://www.rethinkrobotics.com

49

Economic Growth and Automation Risks in Developing
Countries Due to the Transition Toward Digital Modernity

ICEGOV18, April 2018, Galway, Ireland

Pamplona da Costa, C. Rigolin, B. Rondani, M. Staykova, R. taddei, C. till, D.
tyfield, S. Wilford and L. Velho. 2014. Responsible innovation across
borders: tensions, paradoxes and possibilities. journal of Responsible
Innovation, 1(2). 191-199.
[52] Jack Stilgoe. Richard Owen. and Phil Macnaghten. 2013. Developing a
framework for responsible innovation. Research Policy, 42, 1568-1580.

50

