NOTES FROM
THE AI FRONTIER
MODELING THE
IMPACT OF AI ON THE
WORLD ECONOMY

DISCUSSION PAPER
SEPTEMBER 2018

Jacques Bughin | Brussels
Jeongmin Seong | Shanghai
James Manyika | San Francisco
Michael Chui | San Francisco
Raoul Joshi | Stockholm

Since its founding in 1990, the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) has sought
to develop a deeper understanding of the evolving global economy. As the
business and economics research arm of McKinsey & Company, MGI aims
to provide leaders in the commercial, public, and social sectors with the facts
and insights on which to base management and policy decisions.
MGI research combines the disciplines of economics and management,
employing the analytical tools of economics with the insights of business
leaders. Our micro-to-macro methodology examines microeconomic
industry trends to better understand the broad macroeconomic forces
affecting business strategy and public policy. MGIs in-depth reports have
covered more than 20 countries and 30 industries. Current research focuses
on six themes: productivity and growth, natural resources, labor markets,
the evolution of global financial markets, the economic impact of technology
and innovation, and urbanization. Recent reports have assessed the
digital economy, the impact of AI and automation on employment, income
inequality, the productivity puzzle, the economic benefits of tackling gender
inequality, a new era of global competition, Chinese innovation, and digital and
financial globalization.
MGI is led by three McKinsey & Company senior partners: Jacques Bughin,
Jonathan Woetzel, and James Manyika, who also serves as the chairman
of MGI. Michael Chui, Susan Lund, Anu Madgavkar, Jan Mischke,
Sree Ramaswamy, and Jaana Remes are MGI partners, and Mekala Krishnan
and Jeongmin Seong are MGI senior fellows.
Project teams are led by the MGI partners and a group of senior fellows,
and include consultants from McKinsey offices around the world. These
teams draw on McKinseys global network of partners and industry and
management experts. Advice and input to MGI research are provided by
the MGI Council, members of which are also involved in MGIs research.
MGI Council members are drawn from around the world and from various
sectors and include Andrs Cadena, Sandrine Devillard, Richard Dobbs,
Tarek Elmasry, Katy George, Rajat Gupta, Eric Hazan, Eric Labaye, Acha Leke,
Scott Nyquist, Gary Pinkus, Sven Smit, Oliver Tonby, and Eckart Windhagen.
In addition, leading economists, including Nobel laureates, act as advisers to
MGI research.
The partners of McKinsey fund MGIs research; it is not commissioned by any
business, government, or other institution. For further information about MGI
and to download reports, please visit www.mckinsey.com/mgi.

Copyright  McKinsey & Company 2018
2

McKinsey Global Institute



IN BRIEF

NOTES FROM THE AI FRONTIER:
MODELING THE IMPACT OF AI
ON THE WORLD ECONOMY
Continuing the McKinsey Global Institutes ongoing exploration of artificial
intelligence (AI) and its broader implications, this discussion paper focuses
on modeling AIs potential impact on the economy. We take a micro-to-macro
and simulation-based approach in which the adoption of AI by firms arises
from economic and competition-related incentives, and macro factors have an
influence. We consider not only the possible benefits but also the costs related
to implementation and disruption.
 AI has large potential to contribute to global economic activity.
Looking at several broad categories of AI technologies, we model trends
in adoption, using early adopters and their performance as a leading
indicator of how businesses across the board may (want to) absorb AI.
Based on early evidence, our average simulation shows around 70 percent
of companies adopting at least one of these types of AI technologies by
2030, and less than half of large companies may be using the full range of
AI technologies across their organizations. In the aggregate, and netting
out competition effects and transition costs, AI could potentially deliver
additional economic output of around $13 trillion by 2030, boosting global
GDP by about 1.2 percent a year.

WHATS INSIDE?
In brief
Page 1
Introduction
Page 2
1. An approach to assessing
the economic impact of AI
Page 9
2. AI has the potential to
be a significant driver of
economic growth
Page 12
3. Along with large economic
gains, AI may bring
wider gaps
Page 30
4. Considering key questions
can help economic entities
decide how to optimize for AI
Page 46

Technical appendix
 The economic impact may emerge gradually and be visible only over
Page 49
time. Our simulation suggests that the adoption of AI by firms may follow an
S-curve patterna slow start given the investment associated with learning
Acknowledgments
and deploying the technology, and then acceleration driven by competition
Page 61
and improvements in complementary capabilities. As a result, AIs
contribution to growth may be three or more times higher by 2030 than it is
over the next five years. Initial investment, ongoing refinement of techniques
and applications, and significant transition costs might limit adoption by smaller firms.
 A key challenge is that adoption of AI could widen gaps between countries, companies, and workers. AI
may widen performance gaps between countries. Those that establish themselves as AI leaders (mostly developed
economies) could capture an additional 20 to 25 percent in economic benefits compared with today, while emerging
economies may capture only half their upside. There could also be a widening gap between companies, with frontrunners potentially doubling their returns by 2030 and companies that delay adoption falling behind. For individual
workers, too, demandand wagesmay grow for those with digital and cognitive skills and with expertise in tasks
that are hard to automate, but shrink for workers performing repetitive tasks.
 How companies and countries choose to embrace AI will likely impact outcomes. The pace of AI adoption
and the extent to which companies choose to use AI for innovation rather than efficiency gains alone are likely to
have a large impact on economic outcomes. Similarly, how countries choose to embrace these technologies (or
not) will likely impact the extent to which their businesses, economies, and societies can benefit. The race is already
on among companies and countries. In all cases, there are trade-offs that need to be understood and managed
appropriately in order to capture the potential of AI for the world economy.
The results of this modeling build upon, and are generally consistent with, our previous research, but add new results
that deepen our understanding of how AI may touch off a competitive race with major implications for firms, labor
markets, and broader economies, and reinforce our perception of the imperative for businesses, government, and
society to address the challenges that lie ahead for skills and the world of work.

INTRODUCTION
The role of artificial intelligence tools and techniques in business and the global economy
is a hot topic. This is not surprising given recent progress, breakthrough results, and
demonstrations of AI, as well as the increasingly pervasive products and services already
in wide use. All of this has led to speculation that AI may usher in radicalarguably
unprecedentedchanges in the way people live and work.
This discussion paper is part of MGIs ongoing effort to understand AI, the future of work,
and the impact of automation on skills. It largely focuses on the impact of AI on economic
growth.1 Our hope is that this effort helps us to broaden our understanding of how AI
may impact economic activity, and potentially touch off a competitive race with major
implications for firms, labor markets, and economies. Three key findings emerge:
 AI has large potential to contribute to global economic activity. AI is not a single
technology but a family of technologies. In this paper, we look at five broad categories of
AI technologies: computer vision, natural language, virtual assistants, robotic process
automation, and advanced machine learning. Companies will likely use these tools to
varying degrees. Some will take an opportunistic approach, testing only one technology
and piloting it in a specific function. Others may be bolder, adopting all five and then
absorbing them across their entire organization. For the sake of our modeling, we define
the first approach as adoption and the second as full absorption.2 Between these two
poles will be many companies at different stages of adoption; the model captures partial
impact, too. By 2030, our average simulation shows, some 70 percent of companies
may have adopted at least one type of AI technology, but less than half may have fully
absorbed the five categories.3
The pattern of adoption and full absorption may be relatively rapidat the high end of
what has been observed with other technologies. However, several barriers may hinder
rapid adoption. For instance, late adopters may find it difficult to generate impact from
AI because AI opportunities have already been captured by front-runners, and they lag
behind in developing capabilities and attracting talent.4 Nevertheless, at the average level
of adoption implied by our simulation, and netting out competition effects and transition
costs, AI could potentially deliver additional global economic activity of around $13 trillion
1

2

3

4

2

A version of this discussion paper is published in a forthcoming white paper on AI published by the
International Telecommunication Union but, as with all MGI research, is independent and has not been
commissioned or sponsored in any way. MGI research on the future of work, automation, skills, and AI can
be read and downloaded at mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/technology-and-innovation. Key publications
relevant to this paper include A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey
Global Institute, January 2017; Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation,
McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017; Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases,
McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018; and Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce, McKinsey
Global Institute, May 2018. For a data visualization of AI and other analytics, see Visualizing the uses and
potential impact of AI and other analytics, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018 (mckinsey.com/featuredinsights/artificial-intelligence/visualizing-the-uses-and-potential-impact-of-ai-and-other-analytics).
In this paper, we use the terms adoption, diffusion, and absorption. We define adoption as investment
in a technology, diffusion as how adoption spreadsthe process by which an innovation is communicated
over time among the participants in a social systemand absorption as how technology is used within a
firm. Full absorption is when a company uses the adopted technology for all operational purposes across
its broad workflow system. These definitions align with those in academic literature. See, for instance, Toma
Turk and Peter Trkman, Bass model estimates for broadband diffusion in European countries, Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 2012, Volume 79, Issue 1; David H. Wong et al., Predicting the diffusion
pattern of internet-based communication applications using bass model parameter estimates for email,
Journal of Internet Business, 2011, Issue 9; and Kenneth L. Kraemer, Sean Xu, and Kevin Zhuk, The process
of innovation assimilation by firms in different countries: A technology diffusion perspective on e-business,
Management Science, October 1, 2006.
These percentages need to be understood not in terms of numbers of firms per se, but in terms of their share
of economic activity.
These industry dynamics between front-runners and followers are called the rank effect in the literature on
technology adoption literature. See Paul Stoneman and John Vickers, The assessment: The economics of
technology policy, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 1988, Volume 4, Issue 4.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

globally by 2030, or about 16 percent higher cumulative GDP compared with today. This
amounts to about 1.2 percent additional GDP growth per year. If delivered, this impact
would compare well with that of other general-purpose technologies through history.5
Consider, for instance, that the introduction of steam engines during the 1800s boosted
labor productivity by an estimated 0.3 percent a year, the impact from robots during the
1990s around 0.4 percent, and the spread of IT during the 2000s 0.6 percent.6
 The economic impact may emerge gradually and be visible only over time. The
impact of AI may not be linear, but may build up at an accelerating pace over time. AIs
contribution to growth may be three or more times higher by 2030 than it is over the next
five years. An S-curve pattern of AI adoption is likelya slow start due to substantial
costs and investment associated with learning and deploying these technologies, but
then an acceleration driven by the cumulative effect of competition and an improvement
in complementary capabilities. The fact that it takes time for productivity to unfold may
be reminiscent of the Solow Paradox.7 Complementary management and process
innovations will likely be necessary to take full advantage of AI innovations.8 It would be a
misjudgment to interpret this slow-burn pattern of impact as proof that the effect of AI
will be limited. The size of benefits for those who move into these technologies early will
build up in later years at the expense of firms with limited or no adoption.
 A key challenge is that adoption of AI could widen gaps between countries,
companies, and workers. AI could deliver a boost to economic activity, but the
distribution of benefits is likely to be uneven:
 Countries. AI may widen gaps between countries, reinforcing the current digital
divide.9 Countries may need different strategies and responses because AI adoption
levels vary. AI leaders (mostly in developed countries) could increase their lead in AI
adoption over developing countries. Leading countries could capture an additional
20 to 25 percent in net economic benefits compared with today, while developing
countries may capture only about 5 to 15 percent. Many developed countries may
have no choice but to push AI to capture higher productivity growth as their GDP
growth momentum slows, in many cases partly reflecting the challenges related to
aging populations. Moreover, wage rates in these economies are high, which means
that there is more incentive than in low-wage, developing countries to substitute
labor with machines. Developing countries tend to have other ways to improve
their productivity, including catching up with best practices and restructuring their
industries, and may therefore have less incentive to push for AI (which, in any case,
may offer them a smaller economic benefit than advanced economies). This does
not mean that developed economies are set to make the best use of AI and that
developing economies are destined to lose the AI race. Countries can choose to
strengthen the foundations, enablers, and capabilities needed to reap the potential
of AI, and be proactive in accelerating adoption. Some developing countries are
already being ambitious in pushing AI. For instance, China, as we have noted, has

5

6
7

8

9

McKinsey Global Institute

We acknowledge that direct comparison of the impact of AI with that of past technological innovations may
not realistically be possible as our quantification of the impact of AI includes a family of technologies. Such
comparisons are mainly to indicate a broad sense of magnitude.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
The Solow Paradox is a phenomenon in which increased investment in IT is not visible in productivity statistics.
For an in-depth debate, see Mekala Krishnan, Jan Mischke, and Jaana Remes, Is the Solow Paradox back?
McKinsey Quarterly, June 2018.
Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization, McKinsey Global Institute,
February 2018.
Jan A.G.M. van Dijk, The evolution of the digital divide: The digital divide turns to inequality of skills and
usage, in Jacques Bus et al., eds., Digital Enlightenment Yearbook 2012, Amsterdam, Netherlands: IOS
Press, 2012.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

3

a national strategy in place to become a global leader in the AI supply chain, and is
investing heavily.10
 Companies. AI technologies could lead to a performance gap between front-runners
on one side and slow adopters and nonadopters on the other. At one end of the
spectrum, front-runners (companies that fully absorb AI tools across their enterprises
over the next five to seven years) are likely to benefit disproportionately. By 2030,
they could potentially double their cash flow (economic benefit captured minus
associated investment and transition costs), which implies additional annual net cash
flow growth of about 6 percent for more than the next decade.11 Front-runners tend
to have a strong starting digital base, a higher propensity to invest in AI, and positive
views of the business case for AI. Although our simulation treats front-runners as one
group, in reality, this category is not homogeneous. Some current AI innovators and
creators have big starting endowments of data, computing power, and specialized
talent. Other early adopters may not engage in creating these technologies but may
be innovative in how they deploy them. At the other end of the spectrum is a long tail
of laggards that do not adopt AI technologies at all or that have not fully absorbed
them in their enterprises by 2030. This group may experience around a 20 percent
decline in their cash flow from todays levels, assuming the same cost and revenue
model as today. One important driver of this profit pressure is the existence of strong
competitive dynamics among firms, which could shift market share from laggards to
front-runners and may prompt debate on the unequal distribution of the benefits of AI.
 Workers. A widening gap may also unfold at the level of individual workers. Demand
for jobs could shift away from repetitive tasks toward those that are socially and
cognitively driven and others that involve activities that are hard to automate and
require more digital skills.12 Job profiles characterized by repetitive tasks and activities
that require low digital skills may experience the largest decline as a share of total
employment, from some 40 percent to near 30 percent by 2030. The largest gain
in share may be in nonrepetitive activities and those that require high digital skills,
rising from some 40 percent to more than 50 percent. These shifts in employment
would have an impact on wages. We simulate that around 13 percent of the total
wage bill could shift to categories requiring nonrepetitive and high digital skills,
where incomes could rise, while workers in the repetitive and low digital skills
categories may potentially experience stagnation or even a cut in their wages. The
share of the total wage bill of the latter group could decline from 33 to 20 percent.13
Direct consequences of this widening gap in employment and wages would be an
intensifying war for people, particularly those skilled in developing and utilizing AI
tools, and structural excess supply for a still relatively high portion of people lacking
the digital and cognitive skills necessary to work with machines.

10
11

12

13

4

Artificial intelligence: Implications for China, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2017.
Large firms have a competitive advantage in adopting and absorbing AI ahead of industry peers. MGIs
econometric simulation suggests that they have adoption rates around ten percentage points higher than
the average. Similarly, organizations that have a more established digital culture (including elements such
as institutionalized user experience design thinking, a nimble organization, scaled and integrated agile ways
of working across business and IT domains, and a leadership culture that fosters and enables a network
of empowered teams to reach defined goals) are in a better position to accelerate the adoption of AI: their
adoption rates are around eight percentage points higher than those of companies that do not have a digital
culture. In fact, early corporate adopters will benefit from the exponential impact, potentially gaining three
times more economic benefits from AI than followers.
Assessment of the impact of AI on individuals in this research mainly focuses on workers. A more complete
view of the impact on individuals would include discussion of the effect of AI on users, citizens, and
consumers.
For more detail on the impact of automation on wages, see Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Low-skill
and high-skill automation, NBER working paper number 24119, December 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

Gaps may be widening among firms, workers, and countries, but measures can be taken to
manage the transition and steer economies toward higher productivity and job growth. The
disruption that comes with AI may lead to some firms leaving the market and some workers
losing jobs. There will be major challenges for individuals transitioning to new jobs. However,
if they are given the support they need to develop and refresh their skills and return to the
labor market, then resources can be redeployed to more productive parts of the economy.

THE AI REVOLUTION IS NOT IN ITS INFANCY, BUT THE MAJORITY OF THE
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AI IS YET TO COME
Substantial progress in many areas has accelerated the development of AI, which has the
potential to reshape the competitive landscape of companies, jobs, and the economic
development of countries. Over the past few years, there have been many breakthrough
results and announcements in natural language processing, machine vision, and games like
Go.14 In addition, many products and services already in wide use employ advances in AI
such as personal assistants and facial recognition systems. Much of this progress has been
the result of progress in three areas:
1. Step-change improvements in computing power and capacity. At the silicon
level, there has been continuous progress from central processing units to graphics
processing units (GPUs). Todays GPUs can be 40 to 80 times faster than the quickest
versions available in 2013. Silicon-level development may put early movers (frontrunners in this analysis) at an advantage because they have the resources to drive
breakthroughs. Companies such as Google are pushing further with tensor processing
units. Many more silicon-level developments are underway. At the cluster level, cloud
solutions offer much cheaper computing and storage services on demand. Microsoft
offers a hybrid solution combining the public and private cloud that helps companies
rapidly ramp up their computing resources and handle spikes in need without large
capital outlays.
2. Explosion of data. The world creates an unprecedented amount of data every day,
feeding algorithms the raw material needed to produce new insights. International Data
Corporation estimates that there may be 163 zettabytes (one trillion gigabytes) of data
by 2025, or ten times the data generated in 2016.15 Enormous diversity in the data being
generated means that organizing and analyzing these data are extremely challenging,
but that there is an unprecedented opportunity to extract value from data that were not
available in the past.16
3. Progress in algorithms. The techniques and algorithms underlying AI have continued to
be developed. Recent advances in deep learning techniques are delivering step changes
in the accuracy of classification and prediction.17 Deep learning uses large-scale neural
networks (the most common are convolutional and recurrent neural networks) that
14

15

16

17

McKinsey Global Institute

For instance, Eric Horvitz and colleagues at Microsoft Research have demonstrated in-stream supervision
in which data can be labeled in the course of natural usage. See Eric Horvitz, Machine learning, reasoning,
and intelligence in daily life: Directions and challenges, Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence Techniques for
Ambient Intelligence, Hyderabad, India, January 2007. AlphaGo Zero used a new form of reinforcement
learning to defeat its predecessor AlphaGo after learning to play the game Go from scratch. See Demis
Hassabis et al., AlphaGo Zero: Learning from scratch, deepmind.com. DeepMind researchers have had
promising results with transfer learning where training is simulated and then transferred to physical robots. See
Andre A. Rusu et al., Sim-to-real robot learning from pixels with progressive nets, arvix.org, October 2016.
For more, see Michael Chui, James Manyika, and Mehdi Miremadi, What AI can and cant do (yet) for your
business, McKinsey Quarterly, January 2018.
John Gantz, David Reinsel, and John Rydning, Data age 2025: The evolution of data to life-critical, IDC white
paper, April 2017.
Behavioral, transactional, environmental, and geospatial data are available from sources including the
web, social media, industrial sensors, payment systems, cameras, wearable devices, and human entry, for
example. See The age of analytics: Competing in a data-driven world, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Ian Goodfellow, Deep Learning, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

5

learn through the use of training data and backpropagation algorithms. Also emerging
are meta-learning techniques that are attempting to automate the design of machinelearning models and neural networks by classifying images in large-scale data sets. Also
notable is the development of reinforcement learning, an unsupervised technique that
allows algorithms to learn tasks by trial and error, improving their performance through
repetition and, in many casesthe game of Go being one examplesurpassing human
capabilities.18 In one-shot learning, an AI model can learn about a topic even where there
is only a small numbereven oneof real-world examples, reducing the need for large
data sets.19
While many of the most public breakthroughs have largely been associated with a relatively
small group of individuals, companies, and institutions and have mainly, but not exclusively,
been US-led, this is changing fast. An increasing number of countries are now starting to
put more emphasis on AI initiatives, with China in particular making huge strides (see Box 1,
More countries are taking measures to advance AI).
Most companies currently face significant limitations on their ability to leverage AI (see
Box 2, Current technical limitations to leveraging AI, and some early progress). However,
the AI revolution is certainly no longer in its infancy. These technologies are already
widely used in business. MGI analysis of more than 400 cases in which companies and
organizations could potentially use AI found that AI is already relatively applicable to real
business problems and can have significant impact in areas including marketing and sales,
supply chain management, and manufacturing. The research found that three deep learning
techniquesfeed forward neural networks, recurrent neural networks, and convolutional
neural networkstogether could enable the creation of between $3.5 trillion and $5.8 trillion
in value each year in nine business functions in 19 countries. This is the equivalent of 1 to
9 percent of 2016 sector revenue.20
A broad range of companies already use AI tools in a wide variety of ways and functions. As
of early 2018, AI was used in supply chains (for instance, Amazons Kiva robot automation
in retail logistics); fixed assets (for example, preventive maintenance of assets by companies
such as Neuron Soundware, which uses artificial auditory cortexes to simulate human
sound interpretation, and can therefore automate the detection and identification of
causes of potential breakdown of equipment); R&D (for instance, Quantum Blacks use
of AI to streamline R&D in Formula 1 racing); and sales and marketing (for example, AIpowered search by Baidu, and Digidays AI-based predictive sales target of business-tobusiness salespeople).21
As funding becomes more widely available, the skills to deploy and manage AI are likely to
spread to a broader swath of companies and take hold across economies.

18
19
20
21

6

Matt Burgess, DeepMinds latest AI breakthrough is its most significant yet, Wired, October 18, 2017.
Yan Duan et al., One-shot imitation learning, arxiv.org, December 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
Jeremy Hsu, Deep learning AI listens to machines for signs of trouble, IEEE Spectrum, December 27, 2016.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

Box 1. More countries are taking measures to advance AI
A number of countries have announced initiatives and plans to drive the use of
AI in their economies. Here we give just a few examples as of mid-2018:
China. The government is prioritizing AI, including its promotion in, for
instance, its 13th Five-Year Plan (which runs from 2016 to 2020), its Internet
Plus and AI plans from 2016 to 2018, and a new generation AI plan. China
has stated that it aims to create a domestic AI market of 1 trillion renminbi
($150 billion) by 2020 and become a world-leading AI center by 2030.1 The
private sector is pushing actively for AI, too. Three of Chinas internet giants
Alibaba, Baidu, and Tencentas well as iFlytek, a voice recognition specialist,
have joined a national team to develop AI in in areas such as autonomous
vehicles, smart cities, and medical imaging.
Europe. European Union (EU) member states have announced their intention
to collaborate on AI more actively across borders to ensure that Europe
is competitive in these technologies and that they can tackle their social,
economic, ethical, and legal ramifications together.2 The EU has called for
$24 billion to be invested in AI research by 2020.3 A number of European
countries have also been driving national initiatives. The French government
has announced an initiative to double the number of people studying and
researching AI projects, set new boundaries for data sharing, and invest
$1.85 billion to fund research and startups.4 The United Kingdom has
published a comprehensive plan to strengthen the core foundation of AI in an
artificial intelligence sector deal and has stated its aim to lead in the field of
AI ethics.5
Asia (outside China). The government of South Korea set up a Presidential
Fourth Industrial Revolution Committee in 2017 and announced that it would
invest $2 billion by 2022 to strengthen its capabilities in AI R&D.6 Singapore
has launched an AI Singapore national initiative to enhance AI capabilities by
forming a partnership of government institutions.7
Canada. International research institute CIFAR is leading the governments
Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy with three new AI institutes: the
Alberta Intelligence Institute in Edmonton, the Vector Institute in Toronto, and
MILA in Montreal; these cities are Canadas three major AI centers.8

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
8

McKinsey Global Institute

China to publish guideline on AI development: Minister, The State Council of the Peoples
Republic of China, March 11, 2018.
EU member states sign up to cooperate on artificial intelligence, European Commission, April
10, 2018.
Aoife White, EU calls for $24 billion in AI to keep with China, U.S., Bloomberg News, May 1,
2018.
Romain Dillet, France wants to become an artificial intelligence hub, TechCrunch, March
29, 2018.
Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal, HM Government, 2018; and UK can lead the way on ethical
AI, says Lords Committee, UK Parliament, April 16, 2018.
South Korea aims high on AI, pumps $2 billion into R&D, SyncedReview, May 16, 2018.
AI Singapore (aisingapore.org/about-ai-singapore/).
Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy, CIFAR (cifar.ca/ai/pan-canadian-artificialintelligence-strategy).

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

7

Box 2. Current technical limitations to leveraging AI, and some
early progress
Businesses have recorded much progress in making AI applicable to
them. However, the following five technical factors are arguably limiting the
application of AI:1
Labeled training data. In supervised learning, machines do not learn by
themselves but need to be taught, which means that humans must label and
categorize the underlying training data. However, promising new techniques
are emerging to reduce time spent on such efforts, including reinforcement
learning and in-stream supervision such as generative adversarial networks, a
supervised learning method in which two networks compete with each other
to improve their understanding of a concept.2
Obtaining sufficiently large data sets. In many business use cases, it can
be difficult to create or obtain data sets large enough to train algorithms.
One example is the limited pool of the clinical-trial data necessary to predict
healthcare treatment outcomes more accurately. Players with access to
vast quantities of data may have an advantage. At present, the availability
of labeled data is critical since most current AI models are trained through
supervised learning, and categorizing data correctly requires a huge amount
of human time. This may change as technologies and algorithms develop. One
technique that could reduce the need for large data sets is one-shot learning,
in which an AI model is pretrained in a set of related data and can then learn
even from a small number of real-world examples.
Difficulty explaining results. It is often difficult to explain results from large,
complex neural-network-based systems. One developmentstill at an early
stagethat could improve the ease of explaining or transparency of models
is local interpretable model agnostic explanations, which attempt to identify
which parts of input data a trained model relies on most to make predictions.
Another technique that is becoming relatively well established is the
application of generalized additive models. They use single-feature models,
which limit interactions between features and enable users to interpret each
one more easily.
Difficulty generalizing. AI models still have difficulty carrying their
experiences from one set of circumstances to another, which leaves
companies having to commit resources to training new models even if use
cases are relatively similar to previous ones. Transfer learning, in which
an AI model is training to apply learning from one task to the next one, is
showing promise.3
Risk of bias. The first four limitations may be solved as technology advances,
but biasin data in particular, but also in algorithmshas raised broad social
concerns and may be challenging to resolve.4 A great deal of academic,
nonprofit, and private-sector research is now underway on this issue.

1
2

3

4

8

What AI can and cant do (yet) for your business, McKinsey Quarterly, January 2018.
Eric Horvitz, Machine learning, reasoning, and intelligence in daily life: Directions and
challenges, Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Ambient Intelligence,
Hyderabad, India, January 2007.
See John Guttag, Eric Horvitz, and Jenna Wiens, A study in transfer learning: Leveraging
data from multiple hospitals to enhance hospital-specific predictions, Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 2014, Volume 21, Number 4.
For more, see Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey
Global Institute, April 2018.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

1. AN APPROACH TO ASSESSING THE
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AI
The new spring for AI has prompted a great deal of research on the economic impact
of AI, and consensus is emerging that it may offer substantial benefits. Thus far, research
finds that a broad range of AI technologies could boost productivity levels and elevate
GDP growth trajectories. The exact numbers vary because researchers have used
different methodologiesfor instance, considering a narrow or broad set of drivers of
economic impact.22
While research to date has provided some early insights, the methodologies deployed have
exhibited some shortcomings and limitations. First, estimates have tended to concentrate on
developed economies such as Europe and the United States, plus China; outside these three
economies, insights have tended to be limited.23 Second, the channels through which the
macroeconomic impact occurs have not been clearly explained or exhaustive. For instance,
research has largely focused on new AI investment demand that substitutes hours worked
by humans. However, the reality is that a large share of AI use cases relate to retrofitting or
replacing old capital investment by, for instance, embedding equipment with smart monitoring
and preventive maintenance. Third, the link between microeconomic behavior and the impact
of AI has not been made clearly. It is important to consider this link given the fact that the
impact of AI depends on the level of its adoption by corporations and government entities, and
that this pace of adoption is closely linked to microeconomic factors such as competition and
the ability of organizations to deploy new technologies. Last but not least, research has tended
to estimate the gross potential of AI, not taking into account the cost of implementation of these
technologies into the socioeconomic system or negative externalities such as the impact of
major disruptions on economic groups. The latter can be material. Consider, for instance, the
cannibalization of old business models through AI-based innovation, or potentially extensive
job reallocation due to the adoption of AI. Such negative externalities may be sufficiently large,
and affect enough entities, to create the risk of a societal backlash against AI that could limit
the full potential anticipated from these technologies.24
This research attempts to take a deeper and more detailed view of the impact of AI. (For a brief
summary of the scope of the research, drawing on our extensive previous analysis of AI and
applying a simulation-based approach, see Box 3, Modeling approach and limitations.) We
have leveraged our previous research on automation to assess tasks and jobs that are at risk
of being replaced by AI and automation technologies.25 On the issue of new jobs that may be
created as AI becomes adopted and absorbed, we rely on early estimates in a set of countries
highlighted in December 2017 MGI research.26 In this paper we mainly focus on the effect of AI
on employment, whereas in earlier MGI research we also considered other broad economic
effects likely to impact future employment such as the aging of populations and infrastructure
investment, for instance. We also use what we learned from analyzing more than 400 AI use
cases to assess the potential of AI in analytics, as well as its possible role in reducing costs and
enhancing the generation of revenue.27
22

23

24

25

26
27

McKinsey Global Institute

See, for instance, Nicholas Chen et al., Global economic impacts associated with artificial intelligence, Analysis
Group, February 2016; Artificial intelligence, automation, and the economy, Executive Office of the President
of the United States, December 2016; and Philippe Aghion, Benjamin F. Jones, and Charles I. Jones, Artificial
intelligence and economic growth, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research working paper number 17027, October 10, 2017.
Digitally-enabled automation and artificial intelligence: Shaping the future of work in Europes digital front-runners,
McKinsey & Company, October 2017.
Other social concerns about AI, including those related to privacy and security, could also mitigate against AI
adoption and therefore limit its economic impact.
See, for instance, A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute,
January 2017.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

9

Box 3. Modeling approach and limitations
This research focuses on AIs potential impact on global
economic activity at the country, sector, company,
and worker levels, using a simulation. It does not
consider other important aspects including ethics
and cybersecurity, or the effect of these technologies
on sustainability. Nor do we quantify aspects of the
consumer surplus that may arise out of using AI
technologies, such as saving time or living a healthier life.
Some clarifications that may be useful include:
 Definition of AI used in the economic modeling.
Characterizing AI precisely is difficult because the
definition tends to change depending on the specific
context of research and application. For the purposes
of our modeling, we used several data sources,
including previous research on automation, analytics,
and corporate surveys.1 Although the scope of AI
technologies covered in various data sets is largely
consistent, the data may include some variations at
the detailed technical level. In the future of work and
automation database, we took an expansive view of
AI that included not only natural language processing,
machine vision, and deep learning, but also robotics
and other automation systems (consistent with
many other researchers considering the impact of
automation and AI on work). In our analysis of potential
AI use cases, we employed a narrower view, focusing
on deep learning techniques (especially feed forward
neural networks, recurrent neural networks, and
convolutional neural networks).2 The company-level
survey used for our modeling of AI adoption and
absorption covers five broad sets of AI technologies,
namely computer vision, natural language, virtual
assistants, robotic process automation, and advanced
machine learning.
 Data sources. We used both AI-specific and
macroeconomic data sets. For AI-specific data,
we used three sources. The first combined MGIs

1

2
3

4
5
6

10

regular survey of approximately 3,000 corporations
in 14 sectors on digital technologies, undertaken for
the VivaTechnology conference in Paris in June 2017,
and the McKinsey annual survey on the extent of
digitization in corporations worldwide.3 The second
was MGIs proprietary database of 400 potential AI
use cases across industries and functions, used in
this research to assess the impact on business.4 The
third was MGIs database that analyzes the potential
to automate individual jobslooking at activities
rather than entire jobsin 46 countries; this work
assessed 800 existing occupations and around 2,000
activities undertaken within these occupations.5
For macroeconomic data, we used statistics from
external organizations including the United Nations,
the World Bank, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and the World
Economic Forum.
 Simulation and econometrics approach. We
used economic modeling and simulation to see how
the impact of AI may change in response to certain
assumptions and inputs. Rather than forecasting
outcomes, based on the best evidence collected so
far, the research simulates the likely impact from AI
given different contexts at the country, sector, and
company levels. For the econometric simulation of
firm-level AI adoption and absorption, we used a
double blind and multi-sample approach to ensure
that our results were solid. MGIs econometrics team
and a team from the Free University of Brussels
independently analyzed both surveys mentioned
above.6 Both teams estimated and converged on
the dynamics of propensity to adopt and absorb
technologies. Each team found that consistent
dynamics of adoption and absorption were visible
in both samples used. Our simulation of economic
impact and competitive dynamics also drew

See A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017; and Jobs lost, jobs gained:
Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017. The online survey was conducted from June 20 to July 10,
2017, and garnered responses from 1,619 C-level executives and senior managers representing the full range of regions, industries, company
sizes, and functional specialties. See How digital reinventors are pulling away from the pack, McKinsey & Company survey, October 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from several hundred use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
The results of these surveys have been discussed previously in Jacques Bughin, Wait-and-see could be a costly AI strategy, MIT Sloan
Management Review, June 15, 2018; and Jacques Bughin, Tanguy Catlin, Martin Hirt, and Paul Wilmott, Why digital strategies fail, McKinsey
Quarterly, January 2018.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

on academic literature (for further detail on our
econometric approach, see the technical appendix).7
 Approach to AI adoption and full absorption. The
concepts of adoption and full (and partial) absorption
have been used in various contexts. In this research,
we use an economic entitynotably a company
and its activities as a unit for adoption. Adoption
of AI is when that entity chooses to invest in one of
the five generic AI technologies (computer vision,
natural language, virtual assistants, robotic process
automation, and advanced machine learning) either
for experimentation or for a narrow functional use.8 Full
absorption means that all five generic AI technologies
are adopted and integrated into broad enterprise
workflows. Full absorption is the stage at which
economic benefits tend to kick in and recur.9 However,
we note that full absorption does not mean that there
is a fixed range of technologies. New technologies and
applications will continue to emerge. In this report, we
use the term full as opposed to partial to indicate
much broader use of AI technologies than is the case
in adoption or a pilot.
 Limitations and sensitivities. Our firm-level
simulation is dependent on the quality of data from the
surveys used as inputs, and we acknowledge that this
approach has two potential limitations. First, survey
answers depend on the knowledge and perceptions
of respondents, and their understanding of AI may
vary, possibly affecting the quality of the insights
and data gathered in this way. Second, the data set

7

8

9

10

from our survey results may be skewed toward early
movers. Extrapolating insights from the survey may
therefore lead us to overestimate the economic impact
because the next wave of companies adopting AI may
display different behavior in terms of AI adoption. For
these reasons, the result of our simulation should be
interpreted as being the upper bound of estimates
of AIs economic impact. However, we also note
that competitive pressure is a key factor driving
up the adoption level. If new companies that are
more agile and embrace AI more rapidly join the AI
race quicker than expected, this could push up the
adoption curve.10 Notwithstanding, the findings in this
research are directionally consistent with our previous
research. We also acknowledge that our simulation
is highly sensitive to the results of corporate surveys
on AI absorption. The adoption and absorption
of AI by companies are the foundation of several
dimensions of impact we have modeled, including
labor augmentation, substitution, and innovation as
well as transition costs. We have conducted three
annual surveys, and, in general, the results of the
simulation have remained broadly similar. However, we
acknowledge that, when new data are gathered, the
adoption and full absorption curve and the results of
the simulation could change.
Note: While simulated figures are given that emerge from
the above methods, the numbers presented in this report
should not be read as forecasts, but rather are intended to
provide a directional perspective on the potential impact
of AI.

Aghion and Jones have studied AIs impact on production function. See Philippe Aghion, Benjamin F. Jones, and Charles I. Jones, Artificial
intelligence and economic growth, October 10, 2017. Korineck and Stiglitz have explored the surplus accruing to innovators, analysis on which
we drew in our simulation of impact for front-runners and nonabsorbers. See Anton Korinek and Joseph E. Stiglitz, Artificial intelligence and
its implications for income distribution and unemployment, NBER working paper number 24174, December 2017. Acemoglu and Restrepo
have undertaken various simulations on capital and labor relationships as well as the impact of automation on employment and wages. See
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Artificial intelligence, automation and work, NBER working paper number 24196, January 2018; and
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Modeling automation, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) working paper number 24321,
February 2018.
This is based on our surveys. Generic AI technologies include machine learning, robotics, and other AI application tools such as virtual
assistants, computer vision, and voice recognition.
Jacques Bughin, The diffusion pattern of Enterprise 2.0 technologies: Worldwide estimates of a bass co-diffusion model for the last 10 years,
Journal of Contemporary Management, December 2016; and Jacques Bughin and Michael Chui, The rise of the networked enterprise: Web
2.0 finds its payday, McKinsey Quarterly, December 2010.
Stephen J. Andriole, Implement first, ask questions later (or not at all), MIT Sloan Management Review, April 13, 2018.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

11

What is new about this latest research is its attempt to gauge the macroeconomic impact of
AI globally, and the fact that we have included in our estimate both the cost of implementing
AI and the impact of a competitive race for adoption and absorption of these technologies.
First, it builds on an understanding of the behavior of firms and the dynamics of various
sectors to develop a bottom-up view of how AI technologies are adopted and absorbed
(see the description of our seven-step micro-to-macro approach in the technical appendix).
Second, the research takes into account the likely disruptions that countries, companies,
and workers are likely to experience as they transition to AI. There will probably be costs
during this transition period, and they need to be factored into any estimate. We look closely
at how economic gains and losses are likely to be distributed among firms, employees, and
countries, and how this distribution could potentially hamper the capture of AI benefits. And
third, the research examines the dynamics of AI for a wide range of countriesclustered into
groups with similar characteristicswith the aim of giving a more global view.
The primary goal of this research is to move the discussion forward by presenting our
approach to simulating the economic benefits and challenges that AI creates, rather than
producing specific forecasts. We will continue to update our analysis as we learn more
about AI technologies and their use on the ground, and accumulate newer data sets. The
numbers presented in this discussion paper will inevitably change, and therefore readers
should take this analysis not as a conclusion but as a guide to the potential economic impact
of AI based on the best knowledge we have at this stage.

2. AI HAS THE POTENTIAL TO BE A SIGNIFICANT
DRIVER OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
Predicting the economic impact of AI or any disruptive technology is a highly speculative
exercise. This is a world of near-continuous discontinuity. We have already highlighted in
our previous work that the scope and pace of automation deployment depend on several
variablessome more predictable than othersincluding technical feasibility, the cost of
developing and deploying technologies for specific uses in the workplace, labor-market
dynamics including the quality and quantity of labor and associated wages, the benefits
of automation beyond labor substitution, and regulatory and social acceptance. Similar
factors are likely to determine the pace of AI adoption.28 In addition to these factors,
competitors enabled by digital technologies can burst upon the scene, seemingly from
nowhere, putting apparently well-protected and robust incumbent businesses under
attack. Vast new markets can rise at a rapid pace. Consider, for instance, that only ten
years ago, China accounted for 1 percent of global e-commerce transactions; today, its
share is over 40 percent.29 Technology has accelerated and intensified the natural forces
of market competition, and developments are extremely hard to read. It is because of such
considerations that we have built scenarios in our previous work, and here extend those
through the use of simulations (please refer to Box 3 for methodology and sources).

28

29

12

Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.
Digital China: Powering the economy to global competitiveness, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

All this said, the results of our simulation of AIs gross and net effect on GDP and labor
markets show that AI could add around 16 percent to global output by 2030, or about
$13 trillion, compared with today. This would be incremental value created in addition to
current global output. This simulation is a combination of a large increase of 26 percent
in GDP growth driven by AI, and costs related to the transition to these technologies (for
instance, labor displacement) and their implementation (for example, the deployment of AI
solutions), as well as negative externalities for the baseline of economic activity (such as loss
of consumption during unemployment). Together these elements may produce an annual
average net contribution of about 1.2 percent of activity growth between now and 2030.
The impact on economies would be significant if this scenario were to materialize. In the
case of steam engines, it has been estimated that, between 1850 and 1910, they enabled
productivity growth of 0.3 percent per year. Research has found that the introduction
of robots in manufacturing and the introduction of IT accounted for 0.4 percent and
0.6 percent in annual productivity increases, respectively.30 Recent estimates put the
productivity impact of information and communications technology (ICT) and early digital
technologies such as broadband at 0.6 percent annually during the 2000s.31

WE EXAMINED SEVEN POSSIBLE CHANNELS FOR AI IMPACT
Several factors affect AI-driven productivity growth, including labor automation, innovation,
and new competition. Micro factors, such as the pace of adoption of AI, and macro factors
such as a countrys global connectedness and labor-market structure contribute to the
size of the impact. Our simulation examined seven possible channels of impact. The first
three relate to the impact of AI adoption on the need for, and mix of, production factors that
have direct impact on the productivity of firms. The other four are externalities linked to the
adoption of AI and related to the broad economic environment and the transition to AI. We
acknowledge that these seven channels are not definitive or necessarily comprehensive, but
rather a starting point based on our current understanding and trends currently underway.
As AI continues to develop, our approach to understanding the implications of AI will need to
continue to evolve.
Production channels
We considered the direct economic impact of AI on three production dimensions. First, we
examined additional complementary inputs to improve productivitywhat economists call
labor and capital augmentation.32 The inputs needed to operate new AI capacity include
new engineers and big data analysts who will develop and deploy AI solutions. Second,
investment in AI technologies will save not only on labor as machines take over tasks that
humans currently perform, but also on old capital, for instance by enabling preventative
maintenance that increases the life span of assets and thereby reduces the need to invest
in new equipment. Third, we looked at more and better innovation associated with AI
technologies. In general, process innovation should enable firms to produce the same
output with lower inputs, while product and service innovation tends to boost output and the
level of inputs such as employment and capital.

30

31
32

McKinsey Global Institute

See Nicholas Crafts, Productivity growth in the Industrial Revolution: A new growth accounting perspective,
The Journal of Economic History, 2004, Volume 63, Issue 2; Nicholas Crafts, Steam as a general purpose
technology: A growth accounting perspective, Economic Journal, 2004, Volume 114, Issue 495; Mary
OMahony and Marcel P. Timmer, Output, input, and productivity measures at the industry level: The EU
KLEMS Database, Economic Journal, 2009, Volume 119, Issue 538; and George Graetz and Guy Michaels,
Robots at work, Centre for Economic Performance discussion paper number 1335, March 2015.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Artificial intelligence, automation and work, NBER working paper
number 24196, January 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

13

Channel 1: Augmentation
The first dimension relates to increased use of labor and capital. McKinsey surveys in
2016 and 2017 suggest that companies are devoting only 10 to 20 percent of their digital
investment budgets to AI tools, but this could increase as they adopt and fully absorb AI
technologies. If this were to happen, it could lead to a large increase in annual investment
levels. New labor would be deployed and capital invested in economies, potentially leading
to higher efficiency.
Investment in AI has complementarities for other factors including jobs. For instance, many
jobs are likely to be needed to build the AI infrastructure and monitor its operation to ensure
its full usealthough most of the time airplanes can be flown automatically, they still have
humans on the flight deck. Today, Google has an army of 10,000 raters who, among
other tasks, look at YouTube videos or test new services. Microsoft operates a Universal
Human Relevance System, a crowdsourcing platform that handles micro and administrative
tasks. Facebook has announced that it will increase the number of moderators from 4,500
to 7,500.33
Between 1980 and 2000 in the United States, about 4 to 9 percent of the workforce were
employed in job categories that did not exist 10 to 15 years earlier.34 Increased capital
investment in AI can create demand for jobsin both existing occupations and new ones
contributing to output growth. For currently demonstrable narrow AI technologies, human
beings are needed to manage and transfer insights from one area of narrow AI to another, in
contrast to the necessary capabilities of artificial general intelligence.35 This additional labor
complements the increased capital invested in AI.
AI will likely also redefine many existing occupations, augmenting human capabilities and
making workers more productive. Our previous research suggested that, on average,
60 percent of occupations have at least 30 percent of activities that theoretically could be
automated by adopting and integrating technologies that exist todaynumbers that clearly
vary from occupation to occupation.36 As machines take over certain activities, workers
are freed up to engage in higher-value tasks using AI tools to be more productive or in other
tasks that machines are not yet able to perform, regardless of their value. In call centers,
for instance, some processes can be automated entirely while others can be handled by
humans much more effectively; AI tools can categorize unaddressed queries accurately,
direct callers to the right person to deal with questions, and prepare customized solutions
for callers.

Channel 2: Substitution
Technologies that offer better results, cost effectiveness, or both tend to substitute other
factors of production. This is the source of much of the current fear about the adoption of AI
coming at the expense of labor as basic and repetitive tasks can increasingly be automated.
Our extensive body of research on the impact of automation on work consistently suggests
that roughly half of the time spent on various tasks could theoretically be automated

33
34

35

36

14

Artificial intelligence will create new kinds of work, The Economist, August 26, 2017.
Jeffrey Lin, Technological adaptation, cities, and new work, Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2011,
Volume 93, Number 2, pp. 554574.
Narrow AI performs one narrow task, while artificial general intelligence seeks to be able to perform any
intellectual task that a human can do. Narrow AI is already here, while AGI has yet to arrive. For further
discussion, see William Vorhies, Artificial general intelligencethe Holy Grail of AI, DataScienceCentral.com,
February 23, 2016.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

by adopting existing technology. The picture could, of course, change depending on
technological progress.37
Simulation in our research found that a midpoint scenario for automation of activities could,
on average, substitute around 15 percent of existing time worked globally by 2030. The
simulation conducted for our latest research arrived at a directionally similar, but possibly
somewhat more aggressive, global resultthe midpoint automation potential might be two
to three percentage points higher.
The difference in these results is due to the fact that the midpoint scenario in our previous
research reflected the median adoption speed of a large set of benchmarked technologies,
but it did not explicitly model the pace of AI adoption taking into account factors such
as competition and the development of digital capabilities at the firm level, as we have
done in this latest analysis. The technology race for AI between firms can create new
business models that enable some companies to steal market share from their rivals. Such
competitive effects have been well documented elsewhere.38
Another reason this latest research may simulate faster adoption and absorption of AI may
be that the corporate survey data sets that are one input to the simulation may be skewed
toward early movers.
The intensity of substitution depends on the relative costs of inputs.39 In this research, we
modeled the labor-substitution effecthow AI technology automates human activities and
effectively substitutes labor with capital, maintaining the output of goods and services but
reducing the labor hours required to achieve that output. The substitution also generates
additional productivity gains over time as capital becomes more efficient and productive as
it learns.

Channel 3: Product and service innovation and extension
Investment in AI beyond what is needed strictly for labor substitution can produce additional
economic output by expanding firms portfolios, increasing channels for products and
services, developing new business models, or some combination of the three. Our research
suggests that firms motivation for adopting and absorbing AI relates as much to a desire
to develop new products and services as to a bid to boost efficiency through automation.
McKinsey surveys have found that about one-third of companies were investing in AI to
improve their sales of current offerings, to expand their offerings of products and services,
or bothpossibly at the expense of their rivals.40 To arrive at a sense of the magnitude of this
effect, we looked in detail at an extensive set of AI use cases and simulated the relative ratio
between the efficiency gained from AI and the magnitude of impact from innovation and
market extension.41
Innovation often creates new value for an economy as new products and services for
underserved markets stimulate consumption. However, in reality, funding for incremental
spending needs to come from somewhere. In our modeling, we assumed that the overall
economic pie can grow to capture the upside of new value. Nevertheless, innovation
may also substitute existing products and services, and innovative firms take share from
others; therefore, not all the value that companies create and capture from innovation is
37

38

39

40
41

McKinsey Global Institute

A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017;
and Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute,
December 2017.
Lihong Qian and I. Kim Wang, Keeping up the Red Queen dynamics? Technology competition for
generational technologies, Academy of Management Proceedings, 2016, Volume 2016, Issue 1.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute,
January 2017.
Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

15

likely to be new to the economy. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a sizable portion of
innovation gains come as a result of competition that shifts market share from nonadopters
to front-runners. Consider how Uber has substituted incumbent taxi rides, or how AI-based
recommendations have tilted sales toward platforms such as Amazon rather than offline
channels. Previous surveys we conducted have consistently suggested that a substantial
portion of the innovation potential of AI could result in shifting output among firms, with
variations according to the industry.42

Externality channels
In combination, the augmentation and substitution of inputs and extra innovative output
produce new economic activity and productivity gains that researchers tend to take as
the measure of the effect of AI on an economy. However, to develop a fuller picture of the
economic impact, other factors need to be taken into account. For instance, the use of AI
tools and techniques can contribute to global flows between countries and facilitate more
efficient cross-border commerce. In this regard, countries that are more connected and
participate more in global flows would clearly benefit more from AI. Gains in economic
activity can be reinvested and continue to produce growth. However, expanded economic
activity can also imply negative externalities arising out of transition costs from implementing
AI technologies and more structural costs linked to loss of competitiveness in firms that
do not adopt AI or workers being displaced because they lack the skills to operate in an
AI-based economy. To draw a more complete picture of the economic impact of AI, we
modeled four additional dimensions, both positive and negative.
Channel 4: Economic gains from increased global flows
Economies are not insular; they interact in a global marketplace. Digital data now make up a
larger share than in the past of international cross-border flows in the form of knowledge and
information exchange, and direct transactions such as cross-border e-commerce.43 These
data flows have already given globally connected, digitally advanced economies a material
boost.44 In previous research, MGI estimated that global data flows boosted global GDP
by about 3 percent a year in 2014.45 This finding implied that digital and data flows could
contribute about 7 percent to GDP growth by 2030 compared with today. We simulated
that AI could account for up to 20 percent of the contribution of data and digital flows, or an
impact of 1.5 percent by 2030 compared with today.
AI can contribute to digital flows in two ways. The first is by facilitating more efficient crossborder commerce. We estimate that about one-third of digital data flows are related to
cross-border e-commerce, and 30 to 40 percent of digital commerce can potentially be
attributable to AI technologies.46 Some have estimated that AI-based recommendation
engines contribute 30 to 40 percent of sales in leading e-commerce players.47 If we
then apply the ratio of firms adopting and absorbing AIabout 50 percent by 2030
AI could perhaps contribute some 5 to 10 percent of the value that digital data flows
create, or a boost to GDP growth of about 0.5 percent by 2030 compared with today.
AI can also boost global commerce by, for instance, improving supply chain efficiency
and reducing complexities associated with global contracts, classification, and trade
compliance. Montreal-based 3CE addresses one major source of supply chain friction
by deploying natural language processing to automatically identify and correctly classify
traded goods according to customs commodity taxonomies (for example, identifying

42
43
44

45
46
47

16

Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017.
Digital globalization: The new era of global flows, McKinsey Global Institute, March 2016.
Jacques Bughin, Cross-border data flows and growth in Europe, DigiWorld Economic Journal, third quarter,
Issue 107, 2017.
Digital globalization: The new era of global flows, McKinsey Global Institute, March 2016.
Artificial intelligence set to transform digital commerce marketing, Gartner, July 2017.
Kumba Sennaar, Artificial intelligence in ecommercecomparing the top 5 largest firms, TechEmergence,
February 1, 2018.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

that manually labeled baby food is the taxonomically correct homogenized composite
food preparation).48 Improvements in transparency and supply chain efficiency can help
companies secure better trade financing, reducing banks concerns about compliance
risks. Banks can use AI technologies to review trade documents, sort and label properly,
and analyze risks in a much less labor-intensive way. Digital data flows already facilitate
cross-border trading, but AI can make that trade even more effective. Take, for instance,
global e-commerce platform Wish, which uses machine learning algorithms and connects
hundreds of millions of merchants and consumers worldwide with targeted ads.
This had an explosive impact on the volume of goods Sweden imports from China in a very
short timea 65 percent jump in volume in a single year between 2016 and 2017.49
The second way that AI generates impact from global flows is by making improved and
expanded use of cross-border data in flows other than commerce, which can enhance the
performance of AI solutions and, in turn, can improve the productivity of local activities,
especially services. We estimated that two-thirds of cross-border digital data flows could
be associated with this effect. We then applied AIs share within these digital data flows
about 35 to 40 percentusing two reference points. The first is MGIs assessment of 400
potential use cases that estimated that AI accounts for about 40 percent of the total value
contribution from analytics.50 The second is a range of corporate surveys that we draw on
to assess AI intensity within digital (AI-related investment out of total digital investment); we
find that this may grow from 10 percent today to 35 percent by 2030.51 We then apply the
ratio of firms adopting and absorbing AI (again, about 50 percent by 2030). The result of this
analysis is that AI could have an impact of 10 to 15 percent on total digital flows, or about a
1 percent boost to GDP, by 2030.
Huge amounts of data cross borders every day, and an increasing share of these flows can
power AI applications.52 For instance, many large sets of clinical data from hospitals around
the world can enhance the accuracy of diagnosing rare cancers. The quality of AI translation
engines can be substantially improved when they can be trained using data in different
languages. Online travel agencies in one country can offer personalized interaction and
services used in another country by analyzing travelers information searches as well as their
travel patterns. In entertainment, the performance of chatbots, news aggregation engines,
and recommendation sites can also benefit from global data flows, and this can encourage
more consumption of content. AI could also drive knowledge spillover effects between
economies.53 We are already seeing digital talent platforms accessible across countries
that help businesses, especially professional services companies, match their need for
expertise with those who have it anywhere in the world. In the early wave of such digital
expertise sharing and matching, specialists would manually scan the internet for relevant
expert profiles. Analytics and machine learning algorithms are increasingly being used to
speed up the process and improve matching; companies doing so include London-based
proSapient and New York-based NewtonX, whose services are accessible from multiple
countries. The business case for international collaboration among companies using such
tools may strengthen.54

48
49
50
51

52

53
54

McKinsey Global Institute

Steve Banker, Global trade is powered by artificial intelligence, Forbes, October 7, 2017.
E-handeln frn Kina har exploderat (E-commerce from China has exploded), PostNord, November 16, 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from hundreds of use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
Various corporate surveys that we conducted suggest that AI intensity within digital (AI-related investment
out of total digital investment) is around 10 percent today. If this ratio grows in line with the overall pace of AI
adoption, it could reach around 35 percent by 2030.
Susan Ariel Aaronson, Data minefield? How AI is prodding governments to rethink trade in data, Centre for
International Governance Innovation, April 3, 2018.
Avi Goldfarb and Daniel Trefler, AI and international trade, NBER working paper number 24254, January 2018.
Bruce Reed and Matthew Atwell, The rise of the expert economy: Could sharing wisdom be the next gig?
Civic, May 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

17

Channel 5: Wealth creation and reinvestment
As AI contributes to the higher productivity of economies, the increased output from
efficiency gains and innovations can be passed to workers in the form of wages and to
entrepreneurs and firms in the form of profits.55 The generation of wealth induced by AI
could create spillover effects that boost economic growth. As workers incomes rise and
they spend more, and firms reinvest their profit into operations, the incremental output can
be channeled back into the economy in the form of higher consumption or more productive
investment as well as jobs growth. Such secondary effects or spillovers may develop over
time; indeed, they have been a major source of sustained growth in the past.
Such benefits will largely have an impact on an economy and its players if they are reinjected
into the domestic economy rather than into other countries. Countries with a higher
propensity to consume domestically, with resource-allocation systems that enable and
encourage reinvestment into the domestic economy, and smaller leakage of capital from the
repatriation of corporate profits or outbound capital flows, can maximize the benefit. The AI
value chain may grow and boost the ICT sector, making an important economic contribution
to an economy. It is important to build a strong AI value chain to maximize the reinjection of
additional output into the economy.

Channel 6: Transition and implementation costs
A range of costs are likely to be incurred while executing the transition to AI. Companies are
likely to incur cost restructuring their organizations. Some workers may be displaced by new
technologies, and companies might need to pay associated costs such as severance. As
they adopt new solutions, businesses may need to pay fees to cover the cost of systems,
their integration, and associated project and consulting fees. Companies also need to build
capabilities to operate new AI tools, hiring new workers and incurring costs such as fees
associated with advertising and headhunters. Companies also need to upgrade the skills of
their existing workers. As many tasks are automated, employees need to adapt to new types
of work, and many workers will need to be trained to use new digital and AI tools for their
daily operations. We have detailed the workforce-related transitions in our previous work
and draw on that analysis here.56 Disruptions to society may also incur costs (see Channel
7). We do not claim to have fully sized all such externalities, but we have attempted to model
these in our simulation.
Channel 7: Negative externalities
AI could induce major negative distributional externalities affecting workers among others.
Many economists argue that technology has caused a decline in the labor share in many
economies.57 As firms adopt and absorb AI, pressure on employment and wages is likely
to increase, which may depress the labor share of income and potential economic growth
cyclically through lost consumption during periods when individuals are unemployed
or retraining, and structurally through a relative income effect.58 Other costs may have
a direct impact on individuals and an aggregated impact on the economy. Displaced
workers may need to take retraining courses supplied and supported by governments and
companies if they are to swiftly rejoin the workforce. During the transition, there is likely to
be a negative impact on the economy. Those workers who are out of work, and therefore
not earning, are likely to cut their consumption (as well as temporarily not contributing to

55
56

57

58

18

The exact split of distribution of those rents could lead to a lower labor share of output in the economy.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017; and AI, automation, and the future of work: Ten things to solve for, McKinsey Global Institute, June
2018.
Mai Chi Dao et al., Why is labor receiving a smaller share of global income? Theory and empirical evidence,
IMF working paper number 17/169, July 24, 2017.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

economic output). Another cost is government support for affected workers in the form
of unemployment benefits and other social provision. We also know from historical cases
that such externalities can last longer than expected. One example is the so-called Engels
pause, which describes the stagnation of wage growth in Britain in the first half of the 19th
century even as output per worker grew; the profit share of national income increased while
the labor share of income declined.59

OF THE SEVEN CHANNELS OF IMPACT, THREE STAND OUT
Three of the seven channels stand out: (1) the use of AI-driven automation to substitute
existing labor; (2) the application of AI to innovation that creates new and better products
and services; and (3) AI-driven competition and the resulting disruption to firms and workers
(Exhibit 1).

Exhibit 1
AI's net economic impact has seven dimensions.

SIMULATION

Breakdown of economic impact
Cumulative boost vs. today, %

Major impact
2023

Augmentation

Production
channels

3

1

AI technologies
substituting
existing labor

11

2

Substitution

2030

Product and service
innovation and extension

24

3

Innovation
Competition effect

-2

Global data flows and
connectedness

1

Wealth creation
and reinvestment

Externality
channels

3

26

5

Transition and
implementation costs

Net impact

2

0

Gross impact

Negative externalities

-17

-5

-2

Disruption to
the economy
-4

-2

1

16

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

59

Robert C. Allen, Engels pause: Technical change, capital accumulation, and inequality in the British industrial
revolution, Explorations in Economic History, 2009, Volume 46, Issue 4.

AIs economic impact (for ITU)
Discussion
McKinsey Global
Institute
Notes paper
from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy
mc 0906

19

Automation of labor could add up to about 11 percent or around $9 trillion to
global GDP by 2030
The substitution of labor by technology is often viewed from the point of view of the supply
side of workers, and rarely from the demand side of firms. Yet, firms adopt technology for
economic reasonsin the case of AI, the productivity boost available from substituting
labor. The impact on people of being displaced by technology is real and important, an issue
addressed in previous MGI research.60
However, this concern needs to be considered in the context of overall gains in productivity
and economic activity. The impact of automation could be as much as $9 trillion, or around
11 percent higher output by 2030 compared with today. This represents growth in value
added accumulating over the period to 2030, driven by productivity gains from smart capital
and the skills of the labor force, assuming displaced labor can be redeployed elsewhere in
the economy. This is not to say that automation is exclusively beneficial for an economy. Yes,
it drives the productivity of firms, but it also displaces workers. At an aggregate level, the
boost in productivity can lead to greater economic output that is absorbed in the system,
creating additional jobs elsewhere, and the overall economy may benefit. At the micro
level, however, many workers may come under stress, and they will need support as they
transition to an AI-enabled market.
Net gains typically increase over time as the performance of these technologies improves
as we have seen in the case of many general-purpose technologies. For instance, the price
of electric motors in Sweden plunged by as much as 70 percent during the 1920s.61 In
the case of AI technologies, costs have fallen quickly even as performance has increased
rapidly.62 Regarding performance, consider computer vision. In the period to 2011, this AI
tool typically generated the wrong information from large data pools in one case out of four;
five years later, the error rate was only 5 percent, on a par withand even betteringthe
information pattern recognition of an average human being, according to Google Brain.

Innovation in products and services could deliver up to about 7 percent or
around $6 trillion of potential GDP by 2030
AI can make an important contribution by boosting innovation that can then be applied to
improve current products and services, and create entirely new offerings. Our simulation
suggests that innovation can contribute about 7 percent, which could lead to a potential
$6 trillion output increase by 2030, incremental to todays output.
The first reason these AI effects are large is that companies can rapidly improve their top
lines by reaching underserved markets more effectively even with existing products and
services, while the value of gains from input substitution depends on productivity gains
building up over time. The second reason is that, over the longer term, most technologies
tend to foster innovation in products and services, boosting nontraditional industries and
creating entirely new markets. Think about how the high-pressure compact steam engine
moved beyond the factory, leading to a boom in rail and sea travel. The first steam-powered
locomotive hit the rails in Britain in early 1800, and the first ship sailed in the United States by
1807. Consider how ICT was the foundation of the internet economy that is now reshaping
retail, transportation, and media industries. AI is likely to have such transformative impact,
for instance powering a consumer market for genomics and the development of an entirely
autonomous road transportation system.
60
61

62

20

Ibid.
Harald Edquist and Magnus Henrekson, Technological breakthroughs and productivity growth, in Gregory
Clark, Alexander J. Field, and William A. Sundstrom, eds., Research in Economic History, Volume 24, Bingley,
UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2006.
According to some estimates, the cost of industrial robots will fall by roughly 65 percent by 2025, to levels
much lower than most analysts now anticipate. Combined with advances in machine learning and computer
vision, this drop in costs should cause an inflection point in demand for robots as they infiltrate new industries
with more provocative use cases. See Sam Korus, Industrial robot cost decline, Ark Invest, August 7, 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

There are also competitive effects associated with innovation. Although front-runners can
increase their top-line growth, a large portion of gains could be linked to a shift in market
share. The implication is a large degree of cannibalization and firms being challenged if they
do not redefine their product and service portfolios. To counter this effect and improve cash
flow, some firms under competitive pressure are likely to cut investment in R&D, facilities,
and the deployment of new technologies, potentially finding themselves in a vicious cycle.
The risk is well documented in research related to competitive dynamics in digital markets.63

Negative externalities and transition costs could reduce the gross GDP impact
by about nine percentage points, or around $7 trillion
The economic benefits of AI-based automation and innovation are secured at a cost, an
element that existing research tends to overlook. We find that the deployment of AI will very
likely create a shock in labor markets and that there will very probably be costs associated
with managing labor-market transitions, especially for workers whose skills are made
obsolete or less relevant by AI technologies.
Recent MGI research highlights that up to 14 percent of workers might need to change
occupationsand that, while some may change roles within the same company, others
may need to move to new sectors and even geographies.64 The research also found that
while most workers will face competition from AI for some tasks, less than 10 percent of
occupations are made up of activities all (or more than 90 percent) of which can be fully
automated based on currently demonstrated capabilities. Nevertheless, in about 60 percent
of occupations, at least one-third of activities could be automated.
This implies significant changes for workers and workplaces.65 Further, workers mayit is
to be hopedhave access to some social security and unemployment benefits to sustain
them while they are unemployed and before they reenter the workforce. An obsolete
product or service disappears forever except in cases where the product becomes a niche
curiosity; workers retrain, upskill, and reenter the workforce.
Our analysis suggests that these changes will incur costs of about $7 trillion by 2030.
Negative externalities such as loss of domestic consumption during unemployment could
lower the positive impact of AI by four percentage points. Transition and implementation
costs could add another five percentage points of cost (Exhibit 2).66 We note that there are
limitations to our modeling, and that readers should use the results of our simulation to get a
broad idea of the potential costs that may be incurred. It is difficult to calculate costs exactly
because they are likely to be incurred on multiple fronts on the supply and demand sides,
and, in many cases, be interrelated. Moreover, transition costs in one part of the value chain
may generate new value in another part; therefore, the items of cost listed in our simulation
may not be purely additive. We note that our current modeling does not account for detailed
value redistribution across the economy. A more complete and robust macroeconomic
simulation is needed to assess equilibrium and interconnected loops.

63

64

65
66

McKinsey Global Institute

Jacques Bughin, Laura LaBerge, and Anette Mellbye, The case for digital reinvention, McKinsey Quarterly,
February 2017.
For a synthesized view of the labor-market shift, challenges, and potential measures, see AI, automation, and
the future of work: Ten things to solve for, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2018.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
These estimates are based on analysis of reskilling per task rather than reskilling individuals. Most people
will need to reskill for 2.5 tasks on average, which may imply that costs to support such workers in terms of
training and social support may last for six months (a great deal of literature is predicated on the costs being
incurred for a single month). For more on this topic, see, for instance, Ljubica Nedelkoska, Frank Neffke,
and Simon Wiederhold, Skill mismatch and the costs of job displacement, CESifo Area Conference on the
Economics of Education, Munich, Germany, September 1112, 2015; and Benot Pierre Freyens, Measures
of training costs in Australia, Management Research News, August 2006.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

21

Exhibit 2
Substantial transitional costs and negative externalities may accompany the transition to
an AI-enabled economy.

SIMULATION

Buildup of transition socioeconomic costs
% of economic value, cumulative 2030
Example items

-3

Displaced workforce

<1

Implementing solutions

Transition
and implementation
costs

Continuous upgrade of
skills

-1

Skilling and reskilling to
reenter the workforce

Negative
externalities

Training cost by national labor-market
program

-1

Loss of economic
contribution

Unemployed individuals consume less
Unemployed individuals do not produce
economic output

-2

Unemployment
benefits
Total costs

Employee AI-development programs

-1

Loss of domestic
consumption

Direct and indirect benefits during
unemployment

<1
-9

Fees to cover system integration and
consulting fees (for a transformation program)
Advertising, recruiter and referral bonuses,
relocation

-1

Hiring of new workers

Severance pay, accrued paid time off, other
compensation

-4

-5

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

THE IMPACT OF AI BUILDS UP OVER TIME, GATHERING PACE AFTER FIVE TO
TEN YEARS
A net productivity effect builds up over timemodest within five years to material by 2030.
As a result, AIs contribution to growth may be three or more times higher by 2030 than it is
over the next five years. The global net impact of $13 trillion of additional value compared
with todays global GDP is likely to develop over a longer period (Exhibit 3). Although we
present an annual trend curve here, this is largely for illustrative and simulation purposes.
We therefore suggest that readers look at the shape of the curve rather than exact annual
figures. As we have noted, our simulation is dependent on the actual level of adoption
and absorption by firms, and our current firm-level data set may be skewed toward early
adopters. This may mean that the impact shown is an overestimate. In reality, followers may
not have organizational capabilities and investment capacity as strong as those of frontrunners, and their adoption and absorption might be slower.

22

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

The aggregate net impact of AI may take off after a period of five to ten years. In the near
term, there are costs related to the implementation of AI, but subsequently a broader swath
of companies adopt and absorb AI throughout their organizations at an accelerating pace
over the years as a result of competition and improvement in complementary capabilities to
use AI tools. Reminiscent of the Solow Paradox, the small initial impact may persuade some
observers that AI is being overhyped, but this could well lead to misjudgment. The benefits
to early adopters of these technologies increase sharply in later years at the expense
of nonadopters.

Exhibit 3
The economic impact of AI can build up at an accelerating pace.

SIMULATION

Value-added gains of economic output
Cumulative boost vs. today, %
Gross impact
26

30
25

Transition costs and
negative externalities

20
15
16
Net impact

10
5
0
-5
2018

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

2030

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

In aggregate, and over time, the impact of AI is likely to accelerate, boosting productivity
growth. Therefore, companiesand countrieswith proactive AI strategies will likely need
to be committed for the long haul, because the total net impact may become visible only
after a few years.67 We have seen this pattern before with general-purpose technologies
such as steam and electricity: a slow start dominated by investment and low productivity,
followed (sometimes decades later) by impact in the form of higher productivity. One study
found that electricity pervaded businesses and households more generally only after 1915,
when machines operated by stand-alone secondary motors diffused, centralized power
grids spread, and productivity began to rise.68 Another found that the accumulation of
capital in steam engines was slow. After the patenting of the improved steam engine by
James Watt in 1769, it took until 1830 for steam to reach parity with water as a source of
power in the British economy. Even as late as 1870, steam power was largely used in mining
and cotton textile manufacturing.69

67

68

69

McKinsey Global Institute

Harald Edquist and Magnus Henrekson, Technological breakthroughs and productivity growth, in Gregory
Clark, Alexander J. Field, and William A. Sundstrom, eds., Research in Economic History, Volume 24, Bingley,
UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2006.
Paul A. David, Computer and dynamo: The modern productivity paradox in a not-too-distant mirror, in
Technology and productivity: The challenge for economic policy, OECD, 1991.
Nicholas Crafts, Steam as a general purpose technology: A growth accounting perspective, May 2003.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

23

MICRO AND MACRO FACTORS EACH CONTRIBUTE TO THE IMPACT OF AI
Micro and macro factors underpin the impact of AI on global economic activity to broadly
the same extent. The most material micro factors relate to influences on the dynamics of
firms adoption and absorption of AI. The key macro factors include AI investment and
research capabilities as well as key enablers such as digital absorption, human capital,
connectedness to global flows, and labor-market structures and flexibility.
Micro factors influence AI adoption and absorption
The economic impact of AI depends on the rate at which these technologies are adopted by
economic entities and absorbed throughout their organizations. Decisions to invest in these
technologies do not occur in a vacuum, but depend on several important variables that
determine the economic and competitive case for adoption and absorption.
Total absorption level of AI by companies might reach about 50 percent by 2030
Using econometric analysis and proprietary data along with early evidence from surveys
on how companies are adopting AI, we estimate that about 70 percent of companies might
adopt some AI technologies by 2030, up from todays 33 percent, and about 35 percent of
companies might have fully absorbed AI, compared with 3 percent today. Companies that
partially absorb AI technologies are likely to capture partial benefits from AI. In our modeling,
we factored in different degrees of absorption and calculated total absorption by adding
partial and full absorption; it could reach about 50 percent by 2030 (Exhibit 4).

Exhibit 4
AI absorption by firms may reach about 50 percent by 2030taking ten years to match
todays level of digital technologies.

SIMULATION

Share of firms
%
Evolution of AI adoption levels

Evolution of digital and AI absorption levels1

Firms AI adoption

Firms AI absorption2
Total absorption level of digital technologies
Total absorption level of AI technologies

90

80

80

72

70

70

60

60
50

~10 years

40 37

40

30

30

20

20

10

10
0
2017

48

50

20

23

26

29

32

2035

0
2017

20

23

26

29

1 Digital technologies for this purpose are big data, cloud, mobile, and web technologies.
2 Total absorption includes the weighted share of firms that have both partially and fully absorbed AI.
NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

24

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

32

2035

One way to put these estimates into context is to compare them to the absorption of digital
technologies such as web, mobile, cloud, and big data. Those technologies started to be
used about ten to 25 years ago. The average level of absorption of this previous generation
of digital technologies was about 37 percent in 2017 and may reach 70 percent by 2035.
In comparison, absorption of AI might reach todays level of digital absorption by 2027in
roughly ten years.

Early digitization and the competitive race are important determinants of the
pace of AI adoption and absorption
Full absorption takes time, as we have seen in the case of the previous generation of digital
technologies. AI may be adopted and fully absorbed slightly fasterat the high end of
benchmarks of the speed at which technologies percolate. AI adoption and absorption
could be more rapid because of the breadth of ways in which it is used, including in
domains where digitization is still underpenetrated, such as the automation of services and
smart automation of manufacturing processes. Another reason that AI may be adopted
and absorbed more quickly than previous technologies is that its returns tend to be large
and to come with significant cannibalization and substitution that create an imperative to
respond to, and attempt to move ahead of, the competition. Nevertheless, the adoption and
absorption of AI may be bounded by its dependence on the technical infrastructure needed
for its effective use. Two aspects worth highlighting are digitization and competition.
 Digitization. An important factor in the adoption of AI is whether previous digital
technologies are in place, because these are the technical backbone for its effective
rollout.70 Machine learning underpins a large share of AI technologies. Most algorithms
require big data and a digital architecture (however it is provided; for example, via the
cloud or on premises). Superior insight from AI does not translate into increases in
corporate performance unless many activities changefor instance, many salespeople
need to change the way they sell. Even when the technological backbone is present,
companies cannot generate value from AI without the skilled labor and experience
necessary to tap into its opportunities and mobilize change within organizations.
The way the absorption of previous generations of digital technologies affects the
deployment of AI has been demonstrated. Correlating the absorption of AI with the digital
maturity of a firm reveals that companies that are more digitally mature have annual
AI adoption and absorption up to 12 percentage points higher than firms that are less
digitally mature (Exhibit 5).

70

McKinsey Global Institute

Jacques Bughin and Nicolas van Zeebroeck, Artificial intelligence: Why a digital base is critical, McKinsey
Quarterly, July 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

25

Exhibit 5
High digital maturity can accelerate AI adoption and absorption.

SIMULATION

Evolution of total absorption levels of firms with high digital maturity vs average1
Share of firms
%

High digital maturity firms
60

60

+12 pp

50

48
Average

40
30
20
10
0
2017

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

2030

1 Constitutes companies that have absorbed web, cloud, mobile, and big data technologies.
NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Digital Survey; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

 Competitive pressure. Economists have long been interested in how technological
innovation and technology interact with competition. According to both Schumpeterian
and disruptive theory views, the adoption of technology is typically driven by competition
and may build a first-to-market advantage if the performance of the technology is strong
enough to compensate for all the uncertainty surrounding its introduction.71 Some
economists have shown that competition was the most important driver of PC adoption,
for instance.72
Some companies adopt AI in a preemptive move against perceived fear of disruption
from competitors or as a direct response to a new competitor, while others react
more slowly. MGIs econometric analysis and our corporate survey have consistently
suggested that, for each type of AI technology analyzed, the presence of rivals investing
in AI plays a significant role in any decision by a company to invest.

71

72

26

Heidrun C. Hoppe, The timing of new technology adoption: Theoretical models and empirical evidence, The
Manchester School, 2002, Volume 70, Issue 1.
Adam Copeland and Adam Hale Shapiro, The impact of competition on technology adoption: An Apples-toPCs analysis, Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff report number 462, August 4, 2010.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

In this research, taking our corporate survey as an input, the model simulates the extent
to which companies are considering deploying AI technologies in specific functions or
across their broader organization in response to competitive moves made by other firms
in the same industry and geography. We also examined other determinants such as the
impact of AI on profitability and whether tangible use cases are available. Extrapolating
from this microeconomic effect, we find that competitive pressure can increase the
absorption level by about 13 percentage points in 2030 (Exhibit 6).

Exhibit 6
Competitive pressure can accelerate the pace of AI absorption.

SIMULATION

Impact of competitive dynamics on firms to absorb AI technologies1
% of firms
Simulated total absorption levels

48

Excluding industry competitive effects
13pp

Including industry competitive effects
35
29
6pp

23

13

11

2020

2pp

2025

2030

1 McKinseys survey gathered data from C-level executives on whether, and to what extent, they would adopt AI technologies if a competitor or peer did so.
MGI used econometrics to study the effect on adoption and absorption levels with and without this effect to understand the degree to which significant
competition drives adoption and absorption levels.
NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Digital Survey; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

Macro drivers can affect the adoption, absorption, and economic impact of AI,
and potentially lead to a new AI divide
Other important macro drivers can affect the adoption, absorption, and economic impact
of AI technologies by firms and countries. In general, these drivers tend to favor developed
countries more than developing ones. We largely looked at two major categories: (1)
indicators that are directly related to investment and research in AI and the automation
potential of economies; and (2) enablers that are the foundations or preconditions for AIs
potential to be unleashed. We compiled multiple indicators in eight dimensions for 41
countries to gauge the readiness of countries to adopt and absorb AI. These indicators are
by no means exhaustive, but they are useful for gauging the relative positions of countries.
The data set we used has limitations and may not capture the full picture of each dimension.
We intend to continue to refine and update the data we use for this analysis and will improve
the accuracy of our findings as data become available.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

27

AI-related indicators
We assessed the following three types of AI-related indicators:
 AI investment. The economic impact of AI depends on whether there is sufficient
investment to fund new AI companies and research, and enable greater corporate
investment. Investment in AI is growing rapidly but is still largely concentrated in the
United States and China. Tech giants such as Google and Baidu spent an estimated
$20 billion to $30 billion on AI in 2016.73 In 2017, according to CBInsights, $15.2 billion
was invested in AI startups around the world, and nearly half (48 percent) of that total
went to China; 38 percent was invested in the United States. The United States still has
more AI startups than China, but China is making considerable headway in striking
equity deals in the AI sphere. In 2013, the United States accounted for 77 percent of
such deals, but that share fell to 50 percent in 2017.74 We compiled AI-related investment
data from Dealogic, S&P, and Capital IQ. Investment figures include sources of funding
such as seed, grant, mergers and acquisitions, private equity, and venture capital. We
note, however, that we tracked external investments (investment from one firm to
another), a metric that does not capture in-house investment, which could be sizable in
some economies.
 AI research activities. We have noted that AI could have a large gross impact
if companies use it to create new products and services (beyond simple labor
substitution). We analyzed AI-related research activities using data on AI-related patents
from the World Intellectual Property Organization, and AI research using AI publications
and citations from Scimago Journal Rank. We note that these sources do not cover
the full range of work being undertaken by companies, because many corporate
research laboratories may not fully publish the scope and extent of their research given
competitive dynamics. Having said that, its important to note that many corporate labs
are now among the top contributors of AI knowledge for key conferences, including
the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) and the International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).75
 Potential productivity boost from AI and automation. Previous MGI research has
found that the potential to automate and for AI to be deployed can be driven by the
relative costs of machines and wages. Because wages are relatively low in developing
countries, the potential to automate is lower. However, in most developed economies,
higher wages will likely lead to more AI adoption and absorption when it substitutes for
human labor.76 Although we did not explicitly model the impact here, companies that
substitute AI for labor may be motivated not only by cost savings, but also by AIs ability
to outperform humans in some functions. Depending on the wage level, economics, and
social acceptance, the automation potential, and therefore the substitution effect, may
differ. This research used MGIs future of work database to assess different degrees
of potential. Developed economies tend to have high automation potential, because
the business case for AI solutions is easy to justify. The high index reading should be
interpreted as high potential to substitute labor rather than a countrys strength.

73
74
75

76

28

Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017.
Top AI trends to watch in 2017, CBInsights, February 2018.
See Robbie Allen, NIPS accepted papers stats, Machine Learning in Practice, December 5, 2017; and Robbie
Allen, ICML 2018 accepted papers stats, Machine Learning in Practice, July 9, 2018.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017; and
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

AI enablers
The other five dimensions we looked at are enablers. They are the foundations for adoption
and absorption of AI (as well as other emerging technologies), and some are likely to
correlate with AI-related indicators (and therefore these dimensions may not be orthogonal):
 Digital absorption. Conventional measures of digital readiness, maturity, or
competitiveness of countries tend to focus on digital infrastructure: internet penetration,
broadband speed, and affordability for households, for example. There is a wide variety
of data on these measures.77 However, how companies are developing digital assets and
using them across their organization is perhaps the more important precondition of AI.
Our previous work on digitization in China, Europe, and the United States demonstrated
wide variances among sectors and countries. In general, the United States leads, closely
followed by a few European countries such as the United Kingdom and Scandinavian
economies, with China still some distance behind.78 Because our assessment was
based on bottom-up sector-level data, we have limited samples for broad cross-country
comparison on a global basis. We therefore used alternative sources from the Global
Talent Competitiveness Index report. We drew on the technology utilization index, which
measures how corporations are using the latest (digital) technologies in each country as
a proxy for the ability of companies to absorb digitization.
 Innovation foundation. The degree of innovation can determine whether a country
is able to develop and commercialize powerful AI solutions. This research assessed
overall innovation capacity using data on R&D investment from the OECD and
evaluated industry dynamism using data on ICT and business-model creation and ICT
organizational model creation from the Global Innovation Index 2017 report by INSEAD
and the World Intellectual Property Organization. For our modeling, we focused more on
differences among companies in terms of whether they can use the technologies and
create new business models, and whether companies can improve their organizational
models in order to absorb technologies.
 Human capital. Economies need to ensure that they update the skills available not only
to ensure that there are sufficient AI specialists, but also to enable large numbers of
individuals to work alongside machines.79 Human capital is critical to the absorption of
new knowledge and its real-world applications. This research looked at problem-solving
skills using scores from the OECDs Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA); the availability of scientists and engineers as well as employment in knowledgeintensive sectors from INSEAD; the overall quality of human capital from the World
Economic Forums Global Human Capital Index; and the availability of talent using
data on science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) graduates from UNESCO
and Eurostat.

77

78

79

McKinsey Global Institute

For example, the International Telecommunication Unions ICT Development Index; penetration using ITU data
on internet penetration among individuals; quality using ITU statistics on broadband speed; and affordability
from the derived ratio of cost to per capita GDP from BDRC Continental and Cable.co.uk.
In previous MGI research, we have looked at the extent to which sectors in countries and countries are
digitized. While we believe this work to be more in-depth (including detailed sector-level views) than the
metrics used here, this previous analysis did not fully cover all the countries we wanted to include in the
assessments undertaken for this discussion paper, which therefore uses broad digital-related statistics that
we can compare across a larger number of countries. For more, see Digital America: A tale of the haves
and have-mores, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2015; Digital Europe: Pushing the frontier, capturing
the benefits, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2016; and Digital China: Powering the economy to global
competitiveness, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
Digital America: A tale of the haves and have-mores, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2015.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

29

 Connectedness. Countries with stronger connections to the world may have better
foundations for innovation and are most likely to have increased potential to reap the
benefits of AI. Connectedness can help countries use cross-border data flows to
enhance the performance of AI applications and participate in global value chains, as
we have noted. In previous research, MGI looked at global flows and connectedness in
detail, and this analysis builds on that work. We used MGIs Connectedness Index, which
ranks countries on their flows of goods, services, capital, people, and data. Data sources
behind this index include the United Nations, ITC Trade Map, and TeleGeography.
 Labor-market structure and flexibility. Widespread penetration of AI will almost
certainly displace many existing working tasks. Minimizing the risk of societal backlash
will require as smooth as possible a transition to AI by putting in place mechanisms such
as transitional support and training for displaced workers.80 Countries that have robust
social support and extensive provision of training may be less likely to run into popular
opposition to AI that could add cost to its implementation. We compiled scores on
aspects including collaboration between workers and employers, active labor-market
policies, development of employees, and environmental performance from the Global
Competitive Talent Index report published by INSEAD. We also referred to redundancy
cost (costs related to advanced notice and severance payments when terminating
workers) from the World Bank.
Other factors may also play a role, including various legal frameworks governing the use of
data in certain geographies. Examples include the EUs General Data Protection Regulation
and the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018, US sector-based regulation such as the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in
finance. While we acknowledge that regulation and other factors may affect outcomes, we
have limited our model to those factors that we can attempt to quantify.

3. ALONG WITH LARGE ECONOMIC GAINS,
AI MAY BRING WIDER GAPS
While the potential benefits of AI may be large, they are not likely to be distributed equally.
Our simulated estimate of the impact of AI on the world economy is an average of the effect
on different countries, sectors, and firms. There could be widening gaps among countries,
sectors, firms, and workers. This possibility needs to be managed if the potential impact
of AI on the world economy is to be captured in a sustainable wayand even to avoid a
backlash against these technologies that could limit their economic impact.

IN TERMS OF READINESS FOR AI, COUNTRIES APPEAR TO FALL INTO
FOUR GROUPS
Using various indicators for the macro dimensions we have described, we analyzed 41
countries to assess where they stand relative to each other. We calculated a global average
and then measured standard deviation. We categorized countries one standard deviation
above the average as above threshold, and those one standard deviation below the
average as below threshold; we categorized the rest as within the threshold (Exhibit 7).81
This analysis found that there may be four groups of countries that share relatively similar
degrees of preparedness, based on currently available data. We note that the economic
impact of AI is not guaranteed by being in a particular group of countries that look promising
in terms of readinesspassivity will mean that even if the factors appear to be in place for
the rapid adoption of AI, the economic benefits are unlikely to materialize. In addition, the
80
81

30

AI, automation, and the future of work: Ten things to solve for, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2018.
For certain dimensions where values for leading countries are far higher than the average (AI research
activities, for example), we lowered the threshold to show relative differences clearly.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

groups are not fixed; countries could move from one to another over time depending on the
choices they make and the actions they take. In fact, developing economies could potentially
leapfrog advanced ones if they were to strengthen core enablers. An absence of legacy,
inefficiencies in various parts of the economy, and the role of smart capital in overcoming
skills issues may present attractive opportunities for the commercialization of AI use.
The four country groups are:
 Active global leaders (China and the United States). These two countries are currently
leading the race to supply AI, and they have unique strengths that set them apart from
all others. Scale effects enable more significant investment, and network effects enable
these economies to attract the talent needed to make the most of AI. Together, they are
responsible for the vast majority of AI-related research activities. They are a long way
ahead of other countries on AI-related patents, publications, and citations. They also
make substantial investment in AI. In terms of external investment (investment from one
firm to another), including venture capital, private equity, and M&A, the United States
accounted for 66 percent, while China was a distant second with 17 percent in 2016.
However, Chinas share is growing rapidly.82 These countries also have solid enablers. In
2016, they invested about 2 to 3 percent of GDP in overall R&D. Depending on national
priorities and business opportunities, these huge R&D investment capacities could be
channeled into AI. Although Chinas capacity to innovate is increasing, the economy
is digitizing quickly, and investment in AI is substantial.83 China and the United States
are also the large contributors to global trade (in terms of both exports and imports),
responsible for more than 20 percent of all the value being traded globally.
 Economies with strong comparative strengths. A wide range of countries belongs
to this group, including, for instance, Canada, France, South Korea, and Sweden. They
are relatively well positioned to capture the benefits of AI given their generally robust
foundation of enablers. Many of these economies are highly motivated to embrace AI
because they have been experiencing slowing productivity growth.84 Another incentive
is the fact that labor costs tend to be high in these economies, especially advanced
ones. Several large economies belong to this groupincluding Germany, Japan, and
the United Kingdomthat have the capacity to drive innovation on a major scale and to
accelerate the commercialization of AI solutions. Smaller, globally connected economies
such as Finland, Singapore, South Korea, and Sweden typically score highly on their
ability to foster productive environments where novel business models can thrive.
 Economies with moderate foundations. This group, which includes India, Italy, and
Malaysia, has a moderate ability to capture economic benefits from AI. While the potential
for economic gains is broadly positive, these countries are in a weaker starting position
than those in the first two groups, but they exhibit comparative strengths in specific areas
on which they may be able to build. India, for instance, has somewhat underdeveloped
digital infrastructure and currently has a relatively low automation potential, but it
produces around 1.7 million graduates a year with STEM degreesmore than the total of
STEM graduates produced by all G-7 countries. Moreover, a high share of Indias exports
is ICT-related.

82

83

84

McKinsey Global Institute

Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017; and Digital China:
Powering the economy to global competitiveness, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
For further discussion, see The China effect on global innovation, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2015;
and Digital China: Powering the economy to global competitiveness, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.
In Germany, for instance, total economy productivity growth decelerated by 0.7 percent in 201014 versus
200004. In the United States, the decline in private business sector productivity between these two periods
was 3.8 percent. See Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization,
McKinsey Global Institute, February 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

31

Exhibit 7
Varying conditions among countries imply different degrees of AI adoption and absorption,
and therefore economic impact.
Above threshold1
AI-related

Below threshold1

Enablers

Readiness
areas

AI investment

AI
research
activities

Producti- Digital
Innovation Human
vity boost absorption foundation capital
from automation

Connectedness

Labormarket
structure

Examples of
indicators
included

VC, PE,
M&A,
seed,
2
grant

Patents,
publications,
citations

Automation
potential
of
activities

Technology
utilization

MGI
Connectedness
Index

Redundancy
costs,
indexes
on workeremployer
collaboration

Data sources

Dealogic, WIPO,
S&P,
Scimago
Capital IQ Journal
Rank

MGI

OECD,
GTCI
(INSEAD) INSEAD,
WIPO

Group
1

Within threshold1

4

R&D
investment,
businessmodel
creation

PISA
score,
STEM
graduates,
3
GHCI

INSEAD, MGI
WEF,
UNESCO,
Eurostat

World
Bank,
INSEAD

Total
5
score

China
United States

2

Australia

n/a

Belgium

n/a

Canada
Estonia

n/a

Finland

n/a

France
Germany
Iceland

n/a

Israel

n/a

Japan
Netherlands

n/a

New Zealand

n/a

Norway

n/a

Singapore

n/a

South Korea
Sweden
United Kingdom

1 For the threshold, we calculated a global average and then measured standard deviation. If countries are generally one standard deviation above the
average, we categorized them as above and one standard deviation below average as below; we categorized the rest as being within. For certain
dimensions where values for leading countries are far higher than the average, we lowered the threshold to show relative differences clearly.
2 VC = venture capital; PE = private equity; M&A = mergers and acquisitions.
3 PISA = Programme for International Student Assessment, OECD; STEM = science, technology, engineering, and math; GHCI = Global Human Capital
Index; WEF = World Economic Forum.
4 GTCI = Global Talent Competitiveness Index.
5 The score is calculated based on a weighted average of each area that can have a different degree of impact on GDP growth per their elasticity.
NOTE: The contents of this table are indicative. Countries in each group are listed in alphabetical order.
SOURCE: World Bank; UNdata; ILO; Global Innovation Index 2017; World investment report, UNCTAD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

32

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

17(continued)
Exhibit 7
Varying conditions among countries imply different degrees of AI adoption and absorption,
and therefore economic impact (continued).
Above threshold1
AI-related

Below threshold1

Enablers

Readiness
areas

AI investment

AI
research
activities

Producti- Digital
Innovation Human
vity boost absorption foundation capital
from automation

Connectedness

Labormarket
structure

Examples of
indicators
included

VC, PE,
M&A,
seed,
2
grant

Patents,
publications,
citations

Automation
potential
of
activities

Technology
utilization

MGI
Connectedness
Index

Redundancy
costs,
indexes
on workeremployer
collaboration

Data sources

Dealogic, WIPO,
S&P,
Scimago
Capital IQ Journal
Rank

MGI

OECD,
GTCI
(INSEAD) INSEAD,
WIPO

Group
3

Within threshold1

Chile

n/a

Costa Rica

n/a

Czech Republic

n/a

India

n/a

Italy

n/a

Lithuania

n/a

Malaysia

n/a

South Africa

n/a

4

R&D
investment,
businessmodel
creation

PISA
score,
STEM
graduates,
3
GHCI

INSEAD, MGI
WEF,
UNESCO,
Eurostat

World
Bank,
INSEAD

Total
5
score

Spain

4

Thailand

n/a

Turkey

n/a

Brazil

n/a

Bulgaria

n/a

Cambodia

n/a

Colombia

n/a

Greece

n/a

Indonesia

n/a

Pakistan

n/a

Peru

n/a

Tunisia

n/a

Uruguay

n/a

Zambia

n/a

1 For the threshold, we calculated a global average and then measured standard deviation. If countries are generally one standard deviation above the
average, we categorized them as above and one standard deviation below average as below; we categorized the rest as being within. For certain
dimensions where values for leading countries are far higher than the average, we lowered the threshold to show relative differences clearly.
2 VC = venture capital; PE = private equity; M&A = mergers and acquisitions.
3 PISA = Programme for International Student Assessment, OECD; STEM = science, technology, engineering, and math; GHCI = Global Human Capital
Index; WEF = World Economic Forum.
4 GTCI = Global Talent Competitiveness Index.
5 The score is calculated based on a weighted average of each area that can have a different degree of impact on GDP growth per their elasticity.
NOTE: The contents of this table are indicative. Countries in each group are listed in alphabetical order.
SOURCE: World Bank; UNdata; ILO; Global Innovation Index 2017; World investment report, UNCTAD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

33

 Economies that need to strengthen foundations. These countries are relatively
challenged in their ability to capture the economic benefits of AI. They have somewhat
limited automation potential because wages tend to be rather low, and therefore the
incentive to substitute labor to boost productivity is weak. They also have relatively
underdeveloped digital infrastructure, innovation and investment capacity, and digital
skills, and are comparatively isolated from global trade and data flows. These economies
tend to prioritize stimulating economic growth, reducing poverty, and developing away
from agriculture into basic, and then more advanced, manufacturing and services.
Initiatives to catch up with best practices may generate the higher return on investment
rather than making substantial investment in advanced technologies that are currently
beyond their reach. However, the risk is that they may fall behind as other countries
embrace AI.
It is important to note that these groups are not staticcountries may move from one to
another courtesy of the choices they make. It is not inevitable that developed countries will
always be at the forefront of AI adoption and impact, and that developing countries will lag
behind. Countries that take active steps to strengthen their AI foundations, capabilities, and
enablers can change their AI-adoption trajectories. Indeed, our simulation indicates that
the potential economic impact of AI can be sensitive to the pace of AI adoption, AI-related
investment, and innovation capacity.

THE GAP BETWEEN LEADING AND LAGGING COUNTRY GROUPS IS
SIGNIFICANT AND MAY GROW FURTHER
Levels of AI absorption vary significantly between the country groups with the most and the
least absorption (Exhibit 8). According to our simulation, economies with higher readiness to
benefit from AI may achieve absorption levels about 11 percentage points higher than those
of slow adopters by 2023, and this gap looks set to widen to about 23 percentage points by
2030. This indicates that like the digital divide, an AI divide may emerge between advanced
and developing economies.85
As absorption rates diverge, so does the potential economic impact of AI. Because
economic gains combine and compound over time, the simulated gap in net economic
impact between the country groups with the highest economic gains and those with the
least is likely to become larger. Country simulations suggest that there could be a large gap
in economic impact between the leading and the laggingbetween Sweden and Zambia,
for example. That gap could widen from three percentage points in 2025 to 19 percentage
points in 2030 in terms of net GDP impact (Exhibit 9).
Our simulation suggests that AI-enabled growth, especially in some advanced countries
such as Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States, may become as large as
consensus growth projections (Exhibit 10).
The economic drivers of AI impact we have discussed generally favor those groups that
are the most ready for these technologies. However, there are differences in the degree
to which these drivers work to benefit individual countries (Exhibit 11). For instance,
productivity gains from substituting labor are most likely to accrue to countries with high
automation potential. This research finds that advanced economies could gain about 10 to
15 percent of impact from labor substitution, compared with an impact of 5 to 10 percent in
developing economies.

85

34

Diego Comn and Bart Hobij, Cross-country technology adoption: Making the theories face the facts, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York staff report number 169, June 2003.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

Exhibit 8
Gaps in AI absorption levels between groups may increase over time.

SIMULATION

Simulated AI absorption levels per country group
Share of firms, %
Country group
Active global
leaders

Country
example

2023

2030
23

United States

19

China
Economies with
strong
comparative
strengths

Economies with
moderate
foundations
Economies that
need to
strengthen
foundations

52
42

South Korea

25

Sweden

24

54
53

22

Italy

48

20

Brazil

44

Pakistan

14

30

Zambia

14

31

+11 percentage points

+23 percentage points

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

Exhibit 9
The economic impact of AI is likely to be much larger in developed economies.

SIMULATION

Net GDP impact
Cumulative GDP increase, percentage points

Sweden

Zambia

24

+19 pp

5

4
1

+3 pp

2025

2030

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

35

Exhibit 10
AI adoption and absorption could make a large contribution to growth in slow-growing
developed economies.
AI-led growth
%

<$10,000

Per capita GDP

SIMULATION

$10,000$30,000

$30,000+

2.1

1.8

Sweden
South Korea
United Kingdom

1.5

United States

Singapore

1.2

Israel

Estonia

Germany

Australia
Brazil

Italy

0.9

Croatia
Greece

0.6

Pakistan

South Africa

0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

India

Zambia

Peru

0.3

0

China
Malaysia

4.5

5.0

5.5

6.0

6.5

Baseline consensus growth rates (201730)1
Year-on-year growth, %
1 Consensus based on IHS Markit, Economist Intelligence Unit, and Oxford Economics.
NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: IHS Markit; Economist Intelligence Unit; Oxford Economics; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

In the case of innovation gains from developing new products and services, countries with
strong capacity to innovate could potentially generate about 10 percent; for members of
country groups that are less ready, the potential impact could be lower, at 1 to 5 percent.
Globally connected economies could also benefit from global data flows and trade,
which could contribute impact of 1 to 3 percent in comparison with an impact of less
than 1 percentor even a negative impactin the case of the least developed country
group. This differential also reflects the fact that more connected economies with strong AI
foundations and the human capital to drive innovation are also likely to be global suppliers
of AI technologies. Countries with a high propensity to consume and substantial investment
capacity could create an impact of about 5 percent from spillovers into their domestic
economies, compared with 1 to 2 percent in the case of the least ready country group. In
terms of negative externalities, the impact will vary among countries depending on their
pace of AI adoption and their labor-market structures.

36

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

Exhibit 11
The impact of AI adoption and absorption can vary among country groups.

SIMULATION

Breakdown of economic drivers by country group
Incremental GDP increase, percentage points

Archetype

Country
example

Augmentation

Increased Innoproducti- vation/
Wealth
vity from market
creation/
labor sub- extension Global reinveststitution
(net) data flows ment

10

2

6

Gross
impact

United
States

-7

4
9

1

2

24

-4

2

China

9

2

5

South
Korea

-7

11

22

-6

3

5

39
24

-7
-8

4

Sweden

11

5

1

1

21

-3

3

Italy

8

5

1

2

Pakistan

1

1

6

-4

2

2

1

14

-2

8

-1
0

-6

10

0
6

13

19

2

Brazil

Zambia

-3

4

16

Economies
that need to
strengthen
foundations

18

35

16

Economies
with
moderate
foundations

Net
impact

21

-8

10

Economies
with strong
comparative
strengths

Negative
externalities

37

15

Active
global
leaders

Transition
costs

-1

8

-1

5

-1

-1

NOTE. Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

37

MORE DIGITALLY SAVVY, DYNAMIC SECTORS MAY EXPERIENCE GREATER
IMPACT FROM AI
Sectors also have very different dynamics in terms of adopting and absorbing AI and
therefore economic impact.86 In previous MGI research, we found that the digital maturity of
the sectors correlates positively with the state of AI adoption and absorption of the sectors.87
The share of full-time-equivalent positions likely to be substituted by automation and AI
technologies partly depends on job activities and specific industry processes.88
In order to gauge sector-level differences, we chose two sectors as indicative examples:
(1) the telecom and high-tech sector that is adopting AI relatively rapidly; and (2) healthcare,
which is adopting AI slowly. We then simulated potential differences between them in
the economic impact of AI. Using our firm-level survey, we simulated these sectors
different pace of adoption and absorption, and the impact of AI on economic activity.89
Our preliminary simulation shows that the economic impact in the telecom and high-tech
sector could be more than double that of healthcare in 2030. If the national average of
macroeconomic impact is 100, healthcare might experience 40 percent lower impact while
the telecom and high-tech sector could experience 40 percent higher impact than the
national average (Exhibit 12).

Exhibit 12
AI absorption curves can vary by sector, leading to different levels of economic impact.

SIMULATION

Evolution of AI absorption levels

Economic impact by sector

Firms AI absorption
Share of firms
%

Index
100 = macroeconomic impact

Telecom and high tech

Healthcare

140

90
80
70

2.3x

60

18 pp

50

60

40
30
20
10
0
2017

20

23

26

2029

Healthcare

Telecom and
high tech

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Digital Survey; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

86

87
88
89

38

While our current modeling and treatment of survey data are based on a traditional sectoral view, we also
note that traditional sector definitions may lose some relevance over time as companies increasingly blur
these boundaries. Particular sectors could play the role of platforms for others given their strengths in data,
computing power, and innovation capacity.
Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
The sector-level simulation is based on firms headquartered in the United States and Western Europe.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

We will continue to attempt to deepen our analysis of AI adoption by sector as we
accumulate more firm- and sector-level data and insights, but our early findings show that
the impact of AI is likely to vary significantly among sectors. The differences in economic
impact are due to a variety of factors. The extent of competition for market share and new
demand are relatively higher in high tech, which leads to fast adoption and absorption of
AI. Competition in this sector may persuade firms to focus more on innovating than on
aiming for pure cost efficiency. The nature of tasks and the sectors economics may make
a stronger case for telecom and high-tech companies to substitute labor with AI solutions.
In addition, varying degrees of connectedness to global flows and value chains may also
contribute to differences.

AMONG FIRMS, PERFORMANCE GAPS BETWEEN FRONT-RUNNERS AND
NONDIFFUSERS MAY WIDEN
We simulated the economic impact of AI for three groups of companies: front-runners,
followers, and laggards. 90 The first group experiences the largest benefits from AI, and
the last group the lowest (Exhibit 13).
Front-runners are defined as companies that adopt a broad set of AI technologies and
absorb the application of technologies across their organizations over the next five to
seven years. In our simulation, we assumed that this group comprises about 10 percent of
companies whose AI-facilitated growth profile is similar to that of the top quartile of highgrowth performing firms.91 This segment is similar in spirit and size to the early adopters
observed in the theory of technology diffusion laid out by Everett M. Rogers, among
others.92 There may be two types of front-runner. The first type is the producer-user
front-runner that develops and provides AI technologies. Such companies have substantial
advantages in securing critical resources such as talent, computing power, massive data
sets, and more accurate algorithms. The second type is the user-only front-runner that
largely employs AI technologies supplied by the first type. These companies tend to adopt AI
much faster and more effectively than others, and therefore can enhance their competitive
advantage over companies that move later (or not at all). Although we didnt model these
two types separately, it might be worth exploring how they capture value differently, what
determines which type of front-runner a company is, and how the constraints associated
with being a certain type of front-runner change over time.

90

91

92

McKinsey Global Institute

This segmentation is arbitrary and has no effect on the total economic impact on companies. Redefining these
groups simply redistributes total economic gains and losses between the segments we have defined.
Bing Cao, Bin Jiang, and Tim Koller, Sustaining top-line growth: The real picture, McKinsey Quarterly, May
2011.
Rogers diffusion of innovations theory contends that diffusion is the process by which an innovation is
communicated over time among the participants in a social system. Four main elements influence the spread
of a new idea or technology: the innovation itself; communication channels; time; and a social system.
Rogers identifies six segments and posits that 50 percent of the early population is split between innovators
(2.5 percent), early adopters (the next 13.5 percent), and the early majority (34 percent). See Everett M.
Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, New York, NY: The Free Press, 1983. Also see Barbara Wejnert, Integrating
models of diffusion of innovations: A conceptual framework, 2002, Annual Review of Sociology, Volume 28.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

39

Exhibit 13
Faster adoption and absorption by front-runners can create larger economic gains
for these companies.
Front-runner breakdown
% change per cohort

Relative changes in cash flow by AI adoption cohort
% change per cohort, cumulative
130

Front122 runners
(absorbing
within first
5 to 7 years)

120
110
100

SIMULATION

90

Economy-wide
output gains

82

Output gain/loss
from/to peers

135

Transition costs

-18

Capital
expenditure

80

-77

Total

70

122

60
50

Laggard breakdown
% change per cohort

40
30
20

Economy-wide
output gains

Global average
net impact = 16

10

10

0
-10
-20
-30
2017

-23
20

25

Follower
(absorbing
by 2030)
Laggard
(do not
absorb
by 2030)

11

Output gain/loss
from/to peers

49

Transition
costs

4

Capital
expenditure

19

Total

23

2030

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

The simulation finds that front-runners could increase economic value (economic output
minus AI-related investments and transition costs) by 122 percent by 2030, or an implicit
additional growth rate of cash generation of about 6 percent a year for the next 12 years.
Achieving and sustaining this rate of growth over such a long period would be remarkable,
as it conflicts with Gibrats Law that a firms growth rate is independent of its size.93 The
analysis suggests that cash generation is likely to accelerate after a five-year period in
which front-runners could experience cash outflows as they invest in, and scale up, AI.
Front-runners tend to slowly concentrate the profit pool of their industry in a winner-takesall phenomenon. This may lead to the phenomenon of increasing concentration and the
rise of superstar firms. Some researchers argue that technology could enable superstars
to pull away from the pack, but also that a slowdown in the diffusion of technology could

93

40

Yoshi Fujiwara et al., Do Pareto-Zipf and Gibrat laws hold true? An analysis with European firms, Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 2004, Volume 335, Issue 1.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

then prevent laggards from catching up.94 Indeed, the fact that benefits from AI come after
a delay implies a very low discounted return on investment, especially for the latecomers.
However, we also note that there are various approaches to analyzing and explaining the
superstar phenomenonwhy and where it happens, and how to measure itthat need
further study.95
The second group, the followers, consists of firms that are joining the AI party, but
cautiously. They are starting to adopt and absorb AI technologies, having seen the tangible
impact enjoyed by front-runners and having realized the competitive threat of not adopting
and absorbing. We simulated that 20 to 30 percent of firms would be in this group by 2030.
For these companies, the pace and degree of change in cash flow are likely to be more
moderate. On the one hand, front-runners have already triggered some spillover effects that
spread some benefits to followers; on the other hand, followers are cannibalized by frontrunners (although later on, followers do the same to laggards).
The final group comprises laggards (a group that includes nonadopters) that are not
investing in AI seriously or at all. Laggards account for 60 to 70 percent of firms globally
in our simulation. They could lose around 23 percent of cash flow compared with today,
according to our simulation.96 When laggards dont exercise the option of fully investing in AI,
adopting has limited returns because these companies are moving too late. Laggards may
have major capability issues that prevent them from joining the AI race, and therefore they
may need to respond in other ways such as limiting costs and cutting investment. The latter
is a common response observed in industries faced with similar situationscompanies
argue that they are cutting costs to get themselves out of a crunch and preparing for future
growth. A McKinsey survey finds that late adopters and nonadopters of AI reduce their
employment and investment more than other peers.97 This behavior may seem typical of
how companies behave in the face of difficult economic conditions, but in this case, we are
seeing more of a life-cycle phase in which firms adjust to the risk of exiting the market.

94

95

96

97

McKinsey Global Institute

David Autor et al., The fall of the labor share and the rise of superstar firms, May 1, 2017. The authors find that
the rising industry concentration is positively and significantly correlated with the growth of patenting intensity
and total factor productivity, suggesting that concentration is associated with faster technological progress.
They cite a 2015 OECD paper that found widening productivity differences between the top 5 percent of
firms and the rest, which was attributed to a slowdown in technological diffusion between frontier firms and
the laggards that reflected leading firms ability to protect their advantages, contributing to a slowdown in
aggregate productivity growth. Consistent with the OECD findings, they found that in industries where the
speed of diffusion had slowed (indicated by a drop in the pace of citations), concentration had risen by more
and labor shares had fallen by more. For instance, in industries where the proportion of total citations received
in the first five years was ten percentage points lower, concentration rose by an extra 3.3 percentage points.
See Dan Andrews, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter N. Gal, Frontier firms, technology diffusion and public policy:
Micro evidence from OECD countries, OECD future of productivity background paper, 2015.
For a summary of literature on concentration, see Market concentration, OECD Directorate for Financial
and Enterprise Affairs Competition Committee issues paper, June 2018. In summary, the OECDs review of
academic literature finds that there has been a moderate increase in broad measures of concentration in
Japan and the United States (but not in Europe), but that the imprecision of these measures tells us little about
whether competitive intensity has changed.
We see similar divergence between early movers and laggards in the case of digitization. One study found
that, on average, bold, at-scale responses pay off twice as much as semi-bold reactions and three times
as much as medium reactions. There is some variation by industry, but it is not dramatic. In telecom and
high tech, for instance, bold, at-scale reactions have 2.5 times greater payoff than medium reactions. In
manufacturing, it is 2.2 times greater, and in retail and media, 1.9 times greater. The study estimates that a
medium reaction is worth 1.5 points of earnings before interest and taxation (EBIT) growth a year and about
2 points in revenue growth per year, and the effect of a successful bold, at-scale move is roughly 4.5 points in
EBIT and 6 points in revenue. See Jacques Bughin and Nicolas van Zeebroeck, The best response to digital
disruption, MIT Sloan Management Review, April 6, 2017.
Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

41

THERE MAY BE LARGE SHIFTS IN DEMAND FOR CERTAIN SKILLS,
POTENTIALLY WIDENING GAPS BETWEEN WORKERS
Previous MGI research estimated that up to 375 million workers, or 14 percent of the global
workforce, may need to change occupationsand virtually all workers may need to adapt
to work alongside machines in new ways.98 MGI has analyzed 2,000 job activities and
simulated how likely they are to be automated. We identified seven high-level categories
of work activity. Each of these categories has different potential for automation. Three
categories have the highest technical potential for automation at about 60 to 80 percent:
performing physical activity and operating machinery in predictable environments,
processing data, and collecting data. The other four high-level categories have considerably
lower potential to be automated at around 10 to 25 percent: performing physical activities
and operating machinery in unpredictable environments; interfacing with stakeholders;
applying expertise to decision making, planning, and creative tasks; and, least susceptible
to automation, managing and developing people.
Overall, the picture that emerges is one of rising wage and employment opportunity
inequality, broadly consistent with recent academic literature that points to rising wage
inequality when jobs start to be created following a technological disruption.99 Among
different cohorts of workers, we may observe patterns similar to those we have simulated
for firms: groups with superior skill sets may capture a disproportionate share of gains.
Workers engaged in nonrepetitive activities requiring high digital skills could increase the
wages they command because their skills are in short supply, while raising the productivity
they contribute to their employers. In contrast, workers in repetitive tasks are likely to be
squeezed as their skill sets are increasingly irrelevant and their power to negotiate higher
wages is likely to decline. In other words, some workers are at risk of being replaced by
machines, while there could be shortages of workers who can complement what machines
do (see Box 4, Categorizing skill shifts).
Some noteworthy patterns emerge from our simulation (Exhibit 14):
 AI is likely to shift the jobs mix toward tasks requiring high digital skills and those
involving nonrepetitive tasks. A large shift could occur in the category with low digital
skills and repetitive tasks, declining from 43 percent of jobs in the global economy
currently to 32 percent by 2030. The share of jobs requiring high digital and nonrepetitive
tasks might increase from 42 to 53 percent during the same period.100 All stakeholders
in the economypolicy makers, companies, other institutions, and individualswill
need to make a substantial effort to manage this shift. More retraining, job matching,
and mobility programs will be required. Because social and emotional skills cannot be
easily replaced by AI applications, demand for nondigital and nonrepetitive tasks such as
healthcare work could moderately increase, too.
 Uneven wage bill distribution may emerge from AI. Our simulation suggests that
while the share of employment with repetitive activities and requiring low digital skills
could be reduced by 25 percent, total wages associated with these jobs may shrink by
39 percent as employment declines and wages potentially remain stagnant. In contrast,
employment requiring high digital skills and nonroutine tasks may increase, and wages
may go up by more than ten percentage points in 2030, driven by demand and higher

98

99

100

42

Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.
See, for instance, Anton Korinek and Joseph E. Stiglitz, Artificial intelligence and its implications for income
distribution and unemployment, NBER working paper number 24174, December 2017; and Philippe Aghion
and Peter Howitt, On the macroeconomic effects of major technological change, in The Economics and
Econometrics of Innovation, David Encaoua et al., eds., Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
This finding aligns with other research. See, for instance, Vincenzo Spiezia, Measuring the demand for skills in
the digital economy, OECD, 2016.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

productivity.101 Previous MGI research has highlighted two reasons for this. First, there
are changes in the mix of occupations and the wages associated with them. Second,
some forms of automation will be skills-biasedraising the productivity of highly skilled
workers but reducing demand for lower-skill, routine occupations.102 We note that the
findings in this paper are based on indicative scenarios and simulation, and that more
thorough modeling of labor markets will be needed. For example, the outcome of
simulation can be sensitive to the evolution of the labor share of income versus capital,
which is determined by a variety of complex economic factors.
 The effect on skills and wages will vary depending on the company. Changes
in the returns on various skills become even more obvious when we consider jobs at
companies at different stages of AI adoption. In front-runners, the mix of jobs is likely to
evolve quickly toward nonrepetitive activities and activities requiring high digital skills,
accelerating the displacement of workers who perform repetitive tasks. However,
this group of companies can further expand output and employment, using the firstmover advantage of being able to tap into the best talent, and likely paying a premium
to secure it. Front-runners may thus be characterized by their creation of employment
(although some will create huge shocks in traditional industries they disrupt), a higher
mix of nonrepetitive jobs and jobs requiring digital skills, a likely pay premium for higher
skills, and stable employment. Such dynamics are already emerging. Analysis of US
company data suggests that the average wage of workers at top-percentile firms has
been increasing fast, while that of lower-percentile firms has largely been stagnant.103 In
laggards, workers may feel more secure in the next few years because limited skill shifts
will be required. However, as revenue and market shares start to wane, these companies
are likely to be under pressure to cut headcount. Additional pressure on margins will
likely lead to downward pressure on wages, too, and workers for such companies
would then be faced with lower wages or higher risk of losing their job. According to the
OECD, a 10 percent higher risk of automation corresponds to a 4.3 percent decline in
hourly earnings.104
Exhibit 14
AI adoption and absorption can change the employment mix and distribution of wages.

SIMULATION
2017

Employment mix
% of workforce
Employment mix

Wage bill distribution

Nondigital

Nonrepetitive
job profiles

Digital
43

Repetitive
job profiles

2030

32
11

Nondigital

4

33

3

20
42

12

Digital
4
2

15
53

15

49
62

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

101

102
103

104

McKinsey Global Institute

We simulated how the changing nature of tasks and skill requirements can impact employment and wages.
Also see Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Modeling automation, NBER working paper number 24321,
February 2018.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
Jacques Bughin, Why AI isnt the death of jobs, MIT Sloan Management Review, May 24, 2018; and
Nicholas Bloom, Corporations in the age of inequality, Harvard Business Review, April 2014.
Putting faces to the jobs at risk of automation, OECD policy brief on the future of work, March 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

43

Box 4. Categorizing skill shifts
For the sake of simplicity, we have categorized activities
that are highly automatable as repetitive and activities
that are difficult to automate as nonrepetitive, and
then simulated likely trends in these two categories. We
also added another dimension to take account of skills
requirementsdigital versus nondigitalthat could be
a precondition or foundation of applying AI. In reality, the
change in skill mix will be much more complex. However,
even this simple categorization has the merit of providing
some idea of the magnitude of the shift away from the
repetitive, nondigital paradigm that dominated the
previous version of industrial production.
Jobs characterized by degree of repetitive versus
nonrepetitive tasks. Routine and repetitive tasks are the
most likely to be substituted by automation, while new
jobs created are likely to require advanced digital skills
or associated with high-value-added functions such as
design. We find that demand for basic cognitive skills,
including simple data inputting and processing, is likely
to decline from 18 percent of hours worked in 2016 to
14 percent by 2030. In contrast, demand for technological
1
2
3

skillsthe smallest category todaymay rise from
11 percent of hours worked in 2016 to 16 percent by
2030.1 We used MGIs automation database to categorize
repetitive and nonrepetitive jobs, and simulated how the
mix of these would shift as AI is adopted and absorbed.
Although nonrepetitive jobs are not immune to the impact
of automation and AI, the displacement impact on
repetitive jobs is likely to be much bigger.
Jobs characterized by degree of digital versus
nondigital skill requirements. Increasingly, jobs are
likely to need more ICT and digital skills. The OECD has
pointed to future need for technical and professional
skills, including specialist ICT skills for workers who drive
innovation, and the skills necessary to support digital
infrastructure; generic ICT skills for workers and citizens
who need to be able to use these technologies; and
soft skills that complement ICT, including leadership,
communication, and teamwork skills.2 Changing
requirements are already evident in labor markets. In the
United States, for instance, the share of jobs requiring AI
skills has grown 4.5 times since 2013.3

Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2018.
Skills for a digital world, OECD policy brief, December 2016.
Artificial intelligence index, 2017 annual report, November 2017.

AI IS LIKELY TO DISRUPT LABOR MARKETS BUT MAY HAVE A NEUTRAL TO
MODESTLY NEGATIVE IMPACT ON LONG-TERM EMPLOYMENT OVERALL
There has been a great deal of discussion about the displacement impact of automation in
general, and AI in particular.105 A persistent view holds that AI will lead to the loss of existing
jobs to machines, and policy conversations have focused on how to support individuals
through basic income programs, tax reforms, and other redistribution mechanisms that
transfer wealth generated by machines to a permanently displaced workforce. However,
there has been less exploration of the employment opportunities that AI may create through
the expansion of products and services, and of productivity gains that ultimately may
be reinvested in economies, creating jobs.106 Overall, the adoption of AI may not have a
significant impact on net employment in the long term.
In our previous research on the future of work, we found that around half of all work activities
could be automated, adapting currently available technologies, but the proportion of work
displaced by 2030 is likely to be lower because of a range of technical, economic, and
social factors. Our scenarios covering 46 countries suggest that between zero and onethird of work activities could be displaced during this period, with a midpoint of 15 percent.
This proportion varies widely among countries.107 As noted, the firm-level simulation in this
105

106
107

44

On the general impact of automation, see, for instance, John Maynard Keynes, The economic possibilities for
our grandchildren, Essays in persuasion, London, UK: Macmillan, 1931. On the specific impact of AI, see, for
instance, Melanie Arntz, Terry Gregory, and Ulrich Zierahn, The risk of automation for jobs in OECD countries:
A comparative analysis, OECD Social, Employment and Migration working papers number 189, 2016; and
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets, NBER working
paper number 23285, March 2017.
Jacques Bughin, Why AI isnt the death of jobs, MIT Sloan Management Review, May 24, 2018.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

research is generally consistent with these findings but is slightly more aggressive than the
midpoint scenario on a global basis. This reflects, among other factors, the competitive race
among firms highlighted in our survey data.
Considering all the different forces playing out, there is likely to be more rather than less
pressure on full-time employment demand, but the total pressure in the aggregate may
be more limited than many fear. Our average global scenario suggests that total full-timeequivalent employment demand may remain flat at best compared with today.108 In the long
term, total employment demand may be positive if one considers the fact that number of
hours worked per employment unit may continue the downward trend observed over the
past decade. In practice, the dynamics of employment will depend on the interplay of the
five factors illustrated in Exhibit 15.

Exhibit 15
AI adoption and absorption can affect employment in five key ways.

SIMULATION

Impact on employment by 2030, cumulative
% change, FTEs

Labor displaced
due to AI

-18

Labor gains from
augmentation

5

Labor gains from
innovation and
redeployment

10

Labor gains from
reinvestment

1

Labor gains from
global flows

1

Net effect on
employment

-1

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

There will be job losses and gains as AI penetrates. Throughout history, technologies
have displaced existing workers. The horse and carriage was replaced by the car, which
was much faster. As cars became the preferred means of transport, a range of jobs were
displaced, including manufacturers of wagons, carriages, harnesses, and saddles, and
horse breeders, but ten times as many jobs were created in a range of new occupations
including in auto manufacturing, auto dealerships, gas stations, and transportation
and logistics.109
History also tells us that technological innovation creates jobs in the long term. For instance,
the transformative shift from agriculture to industry and then services did not lead to mass
unemployment, but to new types of jobs. One recent study found that up to 9 percent of

108

109

McKinsey Global Institute

Globally, the working-age population is growing, which could pose additional challenges to the labor supply
and to demand dynamics.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

45

US workers in 1980 to 2000 were employed in categories that did not exist 10 to 15 years
previously, as we noted earlier.110
Using historical trends of new jobs created to old jobs, and adjusting for a lower labor-output
ratio that considers the likely labor-saving nature of AI technologies via smart automation,
new jobs driven by investment in AI could contribute about 5 percent to employment by
2030. The boost to employment also comes from AI expanding economic activity through
innovation in products and services, higher participation in global flows, and thus increased
demand for labor. Moreover, additional wealth created in the economy creates spillover
effects, boosting labor demand. These could have a positive contribution to employment of
about 12 percent.
Most jobs created by technology can be outside the technology-producing sector itself.
For instance, MGI estimates that the advent of the personal computer has enabled the
creation of 15.8 million net new jobs in the United States since 198090 percent of them in
nontechnology sectors.111 We cannot be sure that this will happen with the advent of AI, but
historical precedent together with the findings of our executive survey suggest that we can
be optimistic. As noted, competitive pressure is likely to drive corporate investment in AI that
goes beyond what is needed simply to substitute labor, and this investment can create jobs.
Of course, investment in AI needs to be managed to be effective for businesses. AI solutions
need to be modeled and developed by data scientists, and workers then need to be trained
to use them. Other types of AI-related jobs are already emerging, including business
intelligence developers and computer vision engineers.

4. CONSIDERING KEY QUESTIONS CAN
HELP ECONOMIC ENTITIES DECIDE HOW TO
OPTIMIZE FOR AI
The opportunity of AI is significant, but there is no doubt that its penetration may cause
disruption. The productivity dividend of AI probably will not materialize immediatelyits
impact is likely to build up at an accelerated pace over time, and therefore the benefits of
initial investment may not be visible in the short term. Patience and long-term strategic
thinking will be required. Policy makers will need to show bold leadership to overcome
understandable discomfort among citizens about the perceived threat to their jobs as
automation takes hold. Companies will also be important actors in searching for solutions
on the mammoth task of skilling and reskilling people to work with AI. Individuals need
to adjust to a new world in which job turnover may be more frequent, they may have to
transition to new types of employment, and they are likely to need to continually refresh and
update their skills to match the needs of a dynamically changing jobs market.112
In simplified terms, countries can make two broad types of choice. First, they can opt to
adopt AI rapidly or slowly. Second, they can elect to handle labor-market transitions in
such a way as to generate high or low demand for jobs (many of them new) in the economy.
Depending on the choices countries make on these fronts, different scenarios might unfold.
Policy makers and business executives may influenceand need to strive to securethe
best possible outcome: job growth together with higher productivity. To capture these twin
benefits may require them to embrace AI technologies enthusiastically while addressing
transition issues, especially the workforce-related issues we have detailed, to ensure that
productivity gains lead to a virtuous cycle of income growth and higher demand that can
110

111

112

46

Jeffrey Lin, Technological adaptation, cities, and new work, Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011,
Volume 93, Number 2.
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December
2017.
AI, automation, and the future of work: Ten things to solve for, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2018.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

create more jobs.113 However, it is possible for economies to experience secular stagnation
in which neither productivity nor jobs grow. A country that adopts AI at a slow pace may
lose global competitiveness, fail to raise productivity and experience pressure on growth
and difficulties in creating jobs. This would leave such a country in a position of not being
able to deploy displaced workers even if it were to step up its adoption of automation and AI,
leading to a vicious cycle.
To secure the best outcome for their economies, major economic entitiesgovernments,
companies, and individualswill need to address many questions and challenges during
the transition. In this section, we pose some questions that could help them to think about
how to optimize the economic impact of AI. The first set of questions is designed to help
point the way for countries seeking to capitalize on the potential of AI. The second set relates
to how AI could change the basis of competition among firms and sectors. Finally, we offer
questions related to the transition of the individual workers associated with AI.

How countries can capitalize on AI
 How can countries step up investments that are beneficial in their own right but will also
contribute to demand for work?
 How can policy makers evolve education systems and learning with a new emphasis
on creativity, critical thinking, and adaptive and lifelong learning? How can countries
increase investment in human capital, reversing the trend of lowand, in some
countries, decliningpublic investment in worker training?
 How can policy makers improve the dynamism of labor markets, facilitate improved and
faster matching of workers and jobs, enable a wider range of ways of working such as
the gig economy, and solve such issues as portability of benefits, worker classification,
and wage variability?
 How can countries embrace AI and automation safely, addressing issues including data
security, privacy, malicious use, and potential issues of bias?
 How can countries rethink policy related to incomes to minimize disruption in case of a
significant reduction in employment, greater pressure on wages, or both? Should they
consider testing ideas such as conditional transfers, support for mobility, universal basic
income, or some combination of the three? How can they best offer transition support
and safety nets for workers affected? How can countries also forge a new social contract
that garners support from all stakeholders including labor unions?

How AI will change the basis of competition among sectors and firms
 How are computing power and capacity, data, algorithms, and the availability of talent
likely to evolve? How will developments in each of these affect individual firms? Which
could benefit, and which might lose out?
 How can healthy competition be encouraged, maintaining an optimal balance in which
front-runners are rewarded while minimizing the downside that could be imposed by
winner-takes-all dynamics on later movers?
 How are industry structures likely to evolve, and how will sectors be redefined? For
example, what role will be played by technology platforms that are most likely to be
creator front-runners?
 What are the potential effects of widening gaps between front-runners and laggards, and
how could these gaps play out in different sectors?
113

McKinsey Global Institute

Ibid.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

47

 How can companies redesign workflows to help workers adapt to working more closely
with machines and fully absorb AI technologies across organizations? How can they
create more collaborative, agile, and nonhierarchical organizations and cultures?

How individuals should be prepared for the AI-led transition
 How can individuals develop the skills that will be needed to power the AI economy and
embrace a culture of lifelong learning?
 How can individuals leverage new ways of working, including participating in the gig
economy and searching for jobs digitally?

The economic impact of AI is likely to be large, comparing well with other general-purpose
technology in history. At the same time, there is a risk that a widening AI divide could open
up between those who move quickly to embrace these technologies and those who do
not adopt them, and between workers who have the skills that match demand in the AI
era and those who dont. The benefits of AI are likely to be distributed unequally, and if the
development and deployment of these technologies are not handled effectively, inequality
could deepen, fueling conflict within societies. This research is our attempt to simulate how
the transition to AI might unfold. We will continue to refine our analysis as new data become
available and as we learn more about how the shift to AI is progressing on the ground. Our
hope is that this research can help inform the ongoing discussion about AI and its potential
impact on the global economy.

48

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

TECHNICAL APPENDIX
This research models a set of critical channels through which AI can affect the performance
of firms, how this creates spillovers to other economic entities, and therefore the aggregate
performance of sectors and economies.
This modeling and simulation relies on two important features. The first is the quality of
data that provide us with the range of estimates of how AI is perceived by companies and
of how they use these technologies economically and strategically. We use two unique
data sets and surveys to ensure that our modeling has appropriate input. The results of the
modeling and simulation will change as more versatile data sets are created, and therefore
the results presented in this paper may evolve. The second feature of this research is its
inclusion of micro-estimates of the pace of adoption and full absorption of AI technologies.
This adds new insights compared with previous MGI work on AI and the future of work that
largely leveraged a set of benchmarks of how previous technologies diffused in economies.
The approach taken in this analysis is based on the premise that AI should be treated as a
disruptive innovation that has a strong competitive and strategic rationale for companies.114

OUR MICRO-TO-MACRO APPROACH
Our simulation of the economic impact of AI takes a micro-to-macro approach with the
following seven steps:
1. Integrate relevant data sources. The research uses a range of data sources including
two independent corporate surveys that gauge companies appetite to invest in AI.
Complementing these data sets is MGIs proprietary database of 400 existing AI use
cases across industries and functions that we used to confirm the order of magnitude of
AIs potential impact on profits with related cost and revenue drivers.115 Further, to gauge
the impact on labor specifically, the analysis drew on a database developed in MGIs
future of work research that analyzes the potential to automate individual jobslooking
at activities rather than entire jobsin 46 countries; this work assessed 800 existing
occupations and around 2,000 activities undertaken within these occupations, and the
amount of effort and types of capabilities these activities require.116
2. Prepare a foundational data set from econometrics. Using the survey data detailed
in Step 1, the research derives a corporate adoption econometric model that links firms
decision to invest to a set of factors from literature on the diffusion of innovation. This
econometric model therefore endogenizes corporate adoption based on the explicit
competitive and strategic value of AI, rather than taking a set of older technology
adoption curve benchmarks as we did in previous MGI research.117 The rate of adoption
and absorption that results from the econometrics of this research is typically faster
that the average of the technology diffusion rate benchmarks collected in previous MGI
research. This result is consistent with the idea that AI is strongly disruptive.118 For details,
see the section on econometric modeling.
3. Simulate gross GDP impact. In addition to estimating corporate adoption and
absorption of AI, the research models macroeconomic factors expected to be influenced
by AI, namely labor augmentation, labor substitution, product and service innovation, the
114

115
116
117

118

McKinsey Global Institute

See, for example, William J. Abernathy and James M. Utterback, Patterns of industrial innovation,
Technology Review, 1978, Volume 80, Number 7.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from several hundred use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.
A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.
For example, in Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global
Institute, December 2017.
Notes from the AI frontier: Insights from several hundred use cases, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2018.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

49

impact of the global value chain, and the feedback loop in the macroeconomy (that is,
improved productivity leads to additional reinvestment of consumption in the economy).
For the impact of AI on the global value chain, the research factors in the contribution
from increased flows of data, an adjustment in foreign direct investment for the
reinvestment capacity of profit flows, and a trade adjustment in the effect on competition
(for example, companies in a given economy will become more or less competitive
depending on their openness to trade and relative AI absorption).
4. Simulate net GDP impact. Most existing research on the impact of AI tends to focus
on the gross figure. This research models the net impact by taking into account a range
of costs related to the implementation of AI, including investment in the deployment
of systems and transition costs associated with labor, for instance the cost of labor
displacement, retraining, and rehiring. We also assess negative externalities such as loss
of consumption during unemployment as well as social costs incurred by paying benefits
to those who are unemployed during the transition.
5. Simulate the impact on labor markets. The next step was linking the economic
impact with the effect on labor markets, taking into account different skill and wage
levels. Various segments of workers and the tasks they perform (that is, routine versus
nonroutine, and digital versus nondigital) will experience different shifts in employment
and wages.
6. Model country variances. After building a foundational model based on the global
average, the research modeled variances for individual countries. The research
identifies enablers that correlate strongly to factors driving adoption of AI, such as
innovation capacity, human capital, and connectedness to the world. It also modeled
specifics such as digital infrastructure, automation potential, and other macroeconomic
factors including foreign direct investment intensity and unemployment benefits for
each country.
7. Undertake sensitivity analysis. Finally, the results presented in the main body of the
research are the average results for a multiple set of simulations. In order to gauge the
degree of changing impact by key variables, the research includes a sensitivity analysis
of selected variables.

SURVEY DATA
The research draws on two independent corporate surveys conducted by MGI
and McKinsey.
Two independent surveys conducted in 2017
The first is McKinseys regular digital survey of around 1,600 business executives across
industries worldwide on digital technologies and AI to ascertain the causes of economic
impact and the likely pace of that impact.119 It is part of a series of global surveys on
economic matters administered independently by a global research firm. Respondents are
typically executives who receive detailed survey insights as an incentive to respond to the
questionnaire. The questionnaire is typically cross-checked for systematic correlated bias of
answers in order to ensure its scientific validity. The survey universe is 12,000 firms across
sectors and geographies that mimic the world economy. The typical response rate is 10

119

50

The online survey was conducted from June 20 to July 10, 2017, and garnered responses from 1,619
C-level executives and senior managers representing the full range of regions, industries, company sizes,
and functional specialties. See How digital reinventors are pulling away from the pack, McKinsey & Company
survey, October 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

to 15 percent, which is in the high range for surveys. The digital survey received more than
1,600 valid responses, matching other surveys.
The second survey was conducted in 2017 and collected answers from more than 3,000
corporations in 14 sectors in ten countries.120 The MGI survey was also commissioned
externally from a major research firm (a different firm from the one used for McKinseys
digital survey). In total, there were about 25 questions with an average total answer time
of less than 20 minutes in order to maximize take-up rates and adequate responses. The
survey was administered online. The ten countries were Canada, China, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. These
countries were chosen because they are the largest contributors to world GDP, are all
digitally advanced, and have all recently scaled up their investment in AI. The largest portion
of answers came from the United Kingdom (12 percent), followed by the United States.
The country with the fewest answers was Sweden (5 percent). Twenty-seven percent of
respondents came from very small firms with fewer than ten employees, while 7 percent
came from large firms with more than 10,000 employees. The sample covers service,
agriculture, and industrial sectors.
The MGI questionnaire largely overlaps with the McKinsey Digital Survey, and we can
therefore compare responses. One test of consistency between the two surveys is the fact
that the adoption rate for each set of AI technology is not significantly different for the ten
countries that the two surveys have in common.
The MGI survey has the more relevant data for our attempt to model the impact of AI. For
instance, the survey delves deep in an attempt to understand firms objectives for investing
in AIwhether pure automation of processes and labor or capital expenditure enhancement
or new product and service innovations. This is the reference sample we used for our final
simulation, but we used both survey samples to estimate adoption curves and to ensure that
results converge.

Testing sample validity
We performed a set of initial tests on the sample in order to ensure its relevance. While the
tests are only indicative, they suggest that our base of work is relatively solid as a starting
point for estimating the impact of AI on economies.
We note two key tests. The first was to test for answer bias. The second was to confirm that
some robust economic relationships established in economic literature emerged in our data,
too. Specifically, we tested whether there were any differences in our sample of answers
from the original target of firms per sector and country, and in terms of the mean difference
in key financial metrics (revenue, revenue growth, profit, and profit growth) of respondents
and nonrespondents. We used a simple one-way test per financial metric, as well as a
multivariate logit model of a firm answering or not answering, linked to all the financial
metrics. We could not find statistical differences in answer rates. Finally, we tested for some
self-reported biases. We randomized the order of questions for half of the sample and
did not find any bias in types of responses. We checked for systematic responding (either
extreme, or only middle answers). We spotted 122 answers, or 4 percent, where there were
very low differences between answers in all categories of the questionnaire (AI awareness,
AI impact on profit, AI impact on employment, and AI impact on employment mix); we define
very low as being in the bottom 5 percent in terms of differences in answers across all
categories). However, the econometric results are not sensitive to whether these responses
were included, so we kept our full sample as the basis for our simulations.

120

McKinsey Global Institute

Artificial intelligence: The next digital frontier? McKinsey Global Institute, June 2017.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

51

We further tested a few important regularities uncovered in the technology innovation
literature to ensure that they also emerged from our data set. For instance, there is a
size bias (size of firms) in AI adoption.121 We therefore built two indexesone for digital
absorption and one for AI absorption in which absorption is the proportion of digital
technologies and AI used at scale by each corporation. We then ran a cross-section
correlation with firm revenue and employee size. The size-absorption correlation effect is
especially strong for large companies with more than 10,000 employees (the coefficient of
correlation with employee was r = 0.56 for digital and 0.63 for AI).

ECONOMETRICS OF FIRMS ABSORPTION OF AI AND THE IMPACT ON
THEIR PROFIT GROWTH
Variety of models
In order to derive AI adoption and absorption curves, we used a three-step process. The
first two steps link firms adoption of AI to competition and the benefits of AI, demonstrating
a strong stock/dynamic effect in which the propensity to adopt at a certain time (t) is the
result, among others, of the number of competitors already vested and the stock of other
technologies already absorbed. The third step forecasts adoption and absorption at an
aggregate level based on the econometric results and the stock effect, which conditions the
dynamics at time t+1:
 Step 1. The first step was estimating a series of models and relationships at the firm
level related to the adoption of AI and its absorption within workflows for four clusters of
AI technologies (advanced machine learning, robotics and robotic process automation,
virtual assistants, and other tools such as computer vision and language processing).
The model is a logit model where the dependent variable is a binary (yes/no) variable
regarding the state of adoption and absorption, and the set of independent variables
includes a set of factors, notably including: capabilities and learning effects (current stock
of AI technology already invested and current use of previous digital technologies such
as cloud, mobile, and web); uncertainty of use case (as measured by firms perception of
the business case of investing in AI, and negatively linked to the perceived importance of
the technology); state of competition (adoption and absorption of AI technology by rivals);
and complementary effects (for instance, adoption in other AI technologies). In general,
this approach results in statistically robust relationships. The final model relationship
retained was the one with the best fit (adjusted by degrees of freedom). The details of the
results discussed in this appendix suggest strong competitive, stock, and scope effects.
 Step 2: The second step was to estimate a simultaneous model of profit growth and AI
adoption and absorption, using the logic that if faster adoption relative to rivals brings
more profit potential, then the promise of higher profit may improve the business case for
AI, and therefore further push a firm to adopt. This extra step analysis uses instrumental
techniques, with industry and country effects as well as past profitability as instruments.
The profit growth equation is profit expectations over the next three years based on profit
growth of the past three years (reflecting the fact that profit dynamics are typically pathdependent), as well as on AI adoption and absorption, and growth in AI investment. The
analysis confirms that profit growth is path dependent, that is, that one percentage point
of profit growth in the past three years induces 0.6 percentage point of profit-growth
expectation in the next three years. We also find a two-way relationship between AI
adoption and absorption, and profit; there is a 15 to 20 percent uplift for early adopters

121

52

This is a typical stylized fact regarding technology adoptionsee, for instance, a synthesis in Stefanie A. Haller
and Iulia Siedschlag, Determinants of ICT adoption: Evidence from firm-level data, Applied Economics,
2011, Volume 43, Issue 26, pp. 37753788.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

versus the average, and this profit expectation further boosts adoption, but only by a
marginal 3 to 5 percent, depending on the type of AI technology.
 Step 3. Based on a dynamic relationship between stock and diffusion, we used the
econometric equation to simulate how adoption may spread across years. First, we
considered the current stock of AI adoption and absorption at t. For t+1, we used the
digital survey to estimate how digital technologies have been adopted and absorbed
over time, while we used the regression results for each cluster of AI technology to
estimate the marginal portion of companies to adopt AI at time t+1, based on the portion
of companies already vested, the scope effect among clusters of AI technology, and
the stock effect of digital technology. The process is recursive for time t+. One caveat
we note is that the adoption relationship uncovered by the econometrics is assumed
to remain stable. Because this relationship essentially covers the early stage of AI, one
cannot assume that this relationship will hold later. For instance, one may assume that
the competitive effect is not necessarily constant and may decrease with time, as the
strategic value of first-mover advantage has largely disappeared. Thus, our calibration of
Step 3 may be seen as an upper bound.

Econometric model
The process of new technology adoption has been widely studied and debated in economic
literature over the past 20 years. Applying this literature to the practice of AI adoption, the
process suggests that AI is a function of a set of key predictors, outside of control effects
which we note in equation 1.
Pr(AIij)= f (rivalry, digital capabilities, AI complements, expected profitability,) (1)
Where Pr denotes the probability by the ith-firm to adopt the cluster j of AI technology, and
the probability is a function to be estimated of a vector (.,.), ultimately composed of the
following four key predictors assumed to affect the probability to adopt:
 Rivalry. The large body of literature on game theory suggests that the marginal
propensity to adopt depends on the extent of rivalry, or the portion of rivals that has
already decided to adopt the technology. However, the effect of competition is not
known a priori. If one assumes that the benefit to the marginal adopter from acquiring a
new technology decreases with an increase in the number of previous adopterswhich
is the case with strong first-mover advantage and fixed market potentialthen the
effect of rivals adoption may decrease marginal incentives to adopt.122 However, the
diffusion of new technology often creates new markets. Furthermore, there are many
more reasons that the effect of rivalry should have the reversepositiveeffect on
the marginal propensity to adopt. One case in point is when network externalities are
positively related to the number of users of the new technology in the industry. Being
part of a network increases the awareness of the new technology and reduces the risks
associated with adopting and using it.123 Another case is when competition is of the
oligopoly type, with strategic interactions among firms. If the stealing of market share is
enhanced by technology adoption, it should oblige other firms to follow.124 In general,
the literature suggests that the rivalry is usually strongly visible and induces epidemic
adoption when it comes to technology diffusion associated with disruption.125 We posit
122

123

124

125

McKinsey Global Institute

Massoud Karshenas and Paul Stoneman, Technological diffusion, in Paul Stoneman, ed., Handbook of the
economics of innovation and technological change, Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 1995.
Michael Katz and Carl Shapiro, Technology adoption in the presence of network externalities, Journal of
Political Economy, 1986, Volume 94, Issue 4.
John P. Weyant and Kevin Zhu, Strategic decisions of new technology adoption under asymmetric
information: A game-theoretic model, Decision Sciences, 2003, Volume 34, Issue 4.
Giuliana Battisti et al., Inter and intra firm diffusion of ICT in the United Kingdom (UK) and Switzerland (CH): An
internationally comparative study based on firm-level data, Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
2007, Volume 16, Issue 8.

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

53

the same here, as we further control for expected profitability as another factor mediating
the effects of rivalry of adoption patterns in our vector of predictors.
 Digital capabilities. It is generally assumed in the literature on the diffusion of
technology that potential users of a new technology differ from one another on important
dimensions so that some firms adopt more (or faster) than others. This heterogeneity
is called the rank effect.126 One group of rank factors refers to general characteristics
of firms such as location, size, and industry: larger firms tend to adopt faster, or firms
exposed to international competition are more inclined to innovate and adopt new
technologies. In addition to the variables in our vector above, we control in our regression
for the location of company headquarters, global presence, size, and the main industry
in which the company operates. One other rank factor relevant for our purposes is linked
to the digital maturity of the firm. Informally, in our survey, companies report that prior
investment in digital technologies is critical to investment in AI as it brings a new set of
technical and operating complementarity capabilities. Likewise, we know that AI benefits
may rely on the degree of access to big data and architecture, for instance, because
most AI-based algorithms rely to an extent on identifying powerful hidden networks of
relationships among data that are discoverable only with the right big data investment.127
In particular, we use two types of complementary digital technologies. The first is earlyaccess technology such as web and mobile, and the second is advanced technologies
such as cloud, big data, and advanced analytics.
 AI complementarities. As discussed, AI encompasses a multiple set of technologies,
which we have grouped in several clusters in this research. There is clearly a point
where each cluster acts as a complement to another. For example, when a firm uses
AI to automate a process, it will likely combine both advanced robotics and artificial
visualization (so that robots can interface with each other). This complementarity in
technology diffusion has been shown as being large in the case of digital technologies.
 Expected profitability. Any investment decision in a new technology relies on a
business case. We have discussed this loop effect above.
Equation 1 was estimated as a single logit or OLS model or as a system of two equations
with, first, expected profitability, and then Equation 1 with expected profitability instrumented
as described above. Equation 1 was estimated for both adoption and absorption, with the
final model chosen being the one with the best fit, with removal of multicolinearity, and all
misspecification tests (see Exhibit A1 for a summary of the significant effects for adoption
and, for a more concrete synthesis of the results, reporting only statistically significant
coefficients, Exhibit A2).
Their magnitude of impact on adoption and absorption is qualified as high, medium,
or low depending on their odd ratio effect on adoption propensity. In general, the
effects are marginally more significant for decisions to adopt than to absorb. Further,
AI complementarities are relatively strong: companies tend to invest in the broad set of
technologies; expected profitability plays a stimulating role, but the effects are lower than
any other predictors. Rivalry is a pervasive effect, but it is especially visible when it concerns
the adoption and absorption of advanced machine learning techniques.

126

127

54

Massoud Karshenas and Paul Stoneman, Rank, stock, order, and epidemic effects in the diffusion of new
process technologies, 1993, RAND Journal of Economics, Volume 24, Issue 4.
This is in line with research by Harrison and ONeill, who state, Companies that rush into sophisticated AI
before reaching a critical mass of automated processes and structured analytics can end up paralyzed. We
expect complementary technologies such as big data and advanced analytics to have a positive effect on AI
technology adoption. See Nick Harrison and Deborah ONeill, If your company isnt good at analytics, its not
ready for AI, Harvard Business Review, 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

Exhibit A1
Regression results for AI technology cluster corporate absorption.
%
Key
predictors

Adoption of
advanced
machine
learning

Controls
Key
predictors

Advanced
robotics and
robotic
process
automation

Controls
Key
predictors

Natural
language
and
computer
vision

Controls

Estimate

Standard error

Significance

Rivalry

5.01

0.79

0.00

Digital capabilities

2.88

0.40

0.00

AI complementarities

3.31

0.23

0.00

Expected profitability

0.02

0.01

0.09

Region: AsiaPacific

-0.54

0.27

0.04

Region: Europe

-0.39

0.20

0.05

Revenue above $1 billion

0.46

0.17

0.01

Industry: Services

0.87

0.23

0.00

Industry: Retail

0.39

0.35

0.27

Constant

-6.95

0.55

0.00

Rivalry

-5.53

1.15

0.00

Digital capabilities

0.55

0.30

0.07

AI complementarities

2.54

0.20

0.00

Revenue above $1 billion

0.98

0.16

0.00

Region: AsiaPacific

0.32

0.22

0.14

Region: Europe

0.53

0.16

0.00

Industry: Advanced electronics

3.25

1.19

0.01

Industry: Automotive and assembly

1.06

0.34

0.00

Industry: Services

-0.49

0.22

0.03

Industry: Chemicals

1.55

0.42

0.00

Industry: Financial services

1.06

0.31

0.00

Industry: High tech

0.61

0.33

0.06

Industry: Media and entertainment

-1.42

0.38

0.00

Industry: Metals and mining

1.14

0.44

0.01

Industry: Paper and forest products

2.49

1.20

0.04

Rivalry

1.49

0.73

0.04

Digital capabilities

1.31

0.30

0.00

AI complementarities

3.30

0.23

0.00

Revenue above $1 billion

0.21

0.08

0.09

Industry: Chemicals

-0.99

0.47

0.03

Industry: Electric power and natural gas

1.16

0.45

0.01

Industry: Financial services

-0.40

0.22

0.07

Industry: Media and entertainment

0.69

0.32

0.03

Constant

-4.32

0.44

0.00

SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

AI ITU ~ Discussion paper
0827 mc
McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

55

Exhibit A5
A1 (continued)
Regression results for AI technology cluster corporate adoption (continued).
%
Key
predictors

Virtual
assistants
and other
AI tools

Controls

Estimate

Standard error

Significance

Rivalry

0.62

0.21

0.09

Digital capabilities

1.04

0.30

0.00

AI complementarities

3.79

0.25

0.00

Revenue above $1 billion

0.01

0.00

0.00

Region: Latin America

-0.71

0.35

0.04

Industry: Chemicals

-1.44

0.49

0.00

Industry: Electric power and natural gas

-0.67

0.43

0.12

Industry: Infrastructure

-0.87

0.42

0.04

Industry: Pharmaceuticals and medical products

-0.69

0.40

0.09

Industry: Retail

-0.71

0.34

0.04

Constant

-3.15

0.35

0.00

SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

Exhibit A2
Heat map of influence of AI technologies on corporate absorption.
AI uptake
FAKE exh Impact
# foroncorrect
numbering
1

Advanced
machine learning
Adoption2

Absorption3

Advanced robotics
Adoption2

Absorption3



High1



Medium1



Low1

Computer vision and
language processing Virtual assistants
Adoption2

Absorption3

Adoption2

Absorption3

Dimensions

Digital
capabilities
 Absorption cloud
and big data



 Absorption
mobile, internet,
and web












AI complementarities









Rivalry









AI expected
profitability











Average uptake
%

40

15

31

10

43

















7

41

10

1 High = odd ratio > 10; medium = odd ratio > 3; low = odd ratio > 1.
2 Adoption includes both pilot, use cases not at scale, and all their cases of absorption at scale, either functional or across the whole enterprise; absorption is
only adoption at scale across the whole enterprise.
3 Absorption intensity, or the ratio of absorption to adoption rate, as a measure of how adoption is scaled.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

56

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

SOURCES FOR COUNTRY HEAT MAP
In order to assess readiness for AI, we examined more than 25 indicators. Some of the
public sources that we used in this analysis were:
International Telecommunication Union development index: ITU
(http://www.itu.int/net4/ITU-D/idi/2017/)
Internet penetration: ITU (https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx)
R&D expenditure: World Bank
(https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/GB.XPD.RSDV.GD.ZS?view=map)
Gross savings: World Bank (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNS.ICTR.ZS)
ITU ICT business model creation, ITU ICT organizational model creation, ITU ICT use:
World Intellectual Property Organization
(http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_gii_2017.pdf)
AI patents: WIPO Patentscope (https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/search.jsf)
Scimago Journal and Country Rank (https://www.scimagojr.com/)
Global Talent Competitiveness Index: INSEAD (https://gtcistudy.com/gtci-2018-report/)
Redundancy costs: World Bank (https://tcdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/redun
.cost?indicator=659&viz=line_chart&years=2007,2017)
Availability of scientists and engineers; workforce with secondary education: INSEAD GTCI
(https://www.insead.edu/sites/default/files/assets/dept/globalindices/docs/GTCI-2018report.pdf)
PISA problem solving: OECD (http://www.oecd.org/pisa/)
The Global Human Capital Index: World Economic Forum
(https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-human-capital-report-2017)
Global Innovation Index: INSEAD (https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/Home)
Trade: UNCTAD, ICT Trade Map (https://www.trademap.org/Index.aspx)
Macroeconomic indicators: World Bank (https://data.worldbank.org/products/wdi)

SIMULATING COUNTRY-LEVEL ECONOMIC IMPACT
We used multiple data sets to simulate the impact of AI on individual countries. First, we
used macroeconomic data for each country as the basis for capturing differences in the
stage of development and economic structure of individual countries. Each country has
a different profile in terms of GDP, share of consumption, and labor share of economic
activity, for example. Second, we took a subset of AI-related indicators for each country that
are linked to different dimensions of economic impact. We modeled different degrees of
variance by country for each variable, producing a different level of impact for each country.
For example, differences in skill levels by country can have an impact on augmentation,
innovation, and spillovers. Differences in R&D expenditure (an indicator of input into
innovation systems), ICT business creation (an indicator that measures economic activity
enabled by innovation, in particular in startups and small and medium-size enterprises), and
ICT organizational model creation (an indicator to check innovative activity within firms, in
McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

57

particular large ones) will impact the output of innovation. Social indicators such as laboremployer cooperation can have an effect on transition costs (Exhibit A3).

Exhibit A3
Factors considered for country simulation.
Macroeconomic factors
 GDP
 Per capita GDP
 Gross saving rate
 Labor share, capital ratio
 Share of consumption
 Share of corporate profit pool
 Marginal propensity to consume
 Return on capital investment

 Automation

potential total
workforce (MGI)

Input from country scorecard

AI adoption
and
absorption

index (ITU/GII1)





(World Bank)
ICT business
creation (GII)
ICT organizational
model creation
(GII)
Innovation output
(GTCI2)

solving (OECD)

Augmentation



Automation
potential
Digital
skills

Digital
intensity
Global
connectedness

Innovation
capacity
Global flow

Social
conditions

Investment
capacity
Economy
loop

(World Bank)
(MGI survey/
others)





Transition
costs

goods and
services (MGI)
Net ICT import
balance (GII)
Data flows (MGI)
FDI flows (WIS3)

 Labor-employer



 Gross saving
 AI investment



knowledgeintensive services
(GII)
Availability of
scientists and
engineers (GTCI)
ICT use (ITU/GII)

 Trade intensity of
Innovation

 R&D expenditure

 PISA problem-

 Employment in

Substitution

 ICT development

AI impact dimension



cooperation
(GTCI)
Active labor
market policies
(GTCI)
Employee
development
(GTCI)
Environmental
performance
(GTCI)

1 Global Innovation Index 2017.
2 Global Talent Competitiveness Index 2018.
3 World Investment Summit Report 2017.
SOURCE: ITU; World Bank; OECD; INSEAD; WIPO; UNCTAD; Dealogic; S&P; Capital IQ; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

58

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

STRESS TESTING THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF AI
We simulated several questions to assess the sensitivities of economic impact to different
variables (Exhibit A4). We tested six key areas. Of these, the rate of AI absorption and
innovation gains tended to be the most sensitive to a ten-percentage-point change to
baseline assumptions (a 1.1-to 3.6-percentage-point average cumulative impact on GDP by
2030); other areas tended to change moderately (0.2 to one percentage point):
1. AI adoption and absorption levels. It is important to gauge sensitivities of this kind so
that countries can understand the impact on their economies of enabling or hampering
AI adoption and absorption. We simulated a 10 percent change in adoption and
absorption rates for each country by 2030from the 48 percent current global average
to 53 percent, for instance. Globally, increasing the adoption and absorption rate by this
amount yields an additional 1.4 percentage points of cumulative value added by 2030.
2. Investment in AI. AI investment can be used not only to substitute laborious tasks, but
also to develop new business models, products, and services. However, achieving a
healthy return on that investment depends on a number of factors including the countrys
economic context, regulatory policies, infrastructure available for incubating startups,
and appropriate social safety nets (for example, providing the right support environments
for startups). We simulated a 10 percent change in AI investment. Globally, this could
generate an additional 0.7 percentage point of net GDP impact by 2030.
3. Innovation capacity. Each country has different capacity and capabilities for innovation.
We simulated the impact of product and service gains and extension, specifically a
10 percent increase in the effectiveness ratio (the ratio of innovation gains to labor-force
efficiency improvement). Globally, this could lead to a 0.9-percentage-point increase in
GDP by 2030.
4. Global data flows and connectedness. The economic potential of AI also depends
on the economys participation in global cross-border data and trade flows. We
simulated each countrys position on global connectedness, and a 10 percent increase
in data flows. On a global level, the simulation yields a 0.2-percentage-point change;
this could have a different impact on countries depending on their current position in
global connectedness.
5. Transition costs. Economies can avoid certain costs associated with the displacement
of people if they redeploy them rather than let them go, enabling them to shift to
other roles by giving them the appropriate skills. The cost of reskilling depends on
how effective the program is. Effective programs retrain individuals and get them
back into the workforce more quickly, cutting economic cost. We simulated reskilling
taking a 10 percent higher cost that could reduce the GDP impact by 0.3 percentage
point globally.
6. Negative externalities due to increased unemployment duration. The duration of
unemployment has significant implications for economic costs. The longer a person
displaced by AI is unemployed, the longer that individual is not consuming, and any
unemployment benefits also incur an economic cost. We simulated a 10 percent
increase in unemployment period for each country. This would produce a negative
impact on the economic potential of AI of 0.3 percentage point.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

59

Exhibit A4
Countries have different degrees of sensitivity.
Percentage points
Production factors

Increase AI
adoption and
absorption
by 10%
1.4

Global

Active global
leaders

United
States

Externalities

Increase AI
investment
levels
by 10%

Increase
innovation
ratio
by 10%

0.7

0.9

2.6
0.6

South
Korea

Economies
with strong
comparative
strengths

Italy

Brazil

Economies
that need to
strengthen
foundations

-0.3

-0.6

-0.8

-0.3

-0.3

-0.6

-0.6

-0.6

-0.8

-0.5

-0.6

-0.1

-0.1

-0.1

-0.1

-0.1

-0.1

1.6
0.1

1.3

0.2

1.4

0.1

3.5
0.9

Economies
with moderate
foundations

-0.3

0.2

3.6
0.4

Sweden

Increase
average unemployment
period
by 10%

3.5
0.8

China

Increase
global data
flows
by 10%

Increase
cost of
reskilling
displaced
workforce
by 10%

1.6
0.2

2.2
0.7

1.8

Pakistan

1.3

Zambia

1.1

0.6

0.1

0.1

0.7

0.7

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

NOTE: Numbers are simulated figures to provide directional perspectives rather than forecasts.
SOURCE: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

60

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This discussion paper is part of MGIs ongoing research on digital and
automation technologies and AI. The research was led by Jacques Bughin, a
McKinsey senior partner in Brussels and a director of MGI; Jeongmin Seong,
an MGI senior fellow in Shanghai; James Manyika, a McKinsey senior partner,
and director and chairman of MGI in San Francisco; and Michael Chui,
an MGI partner in San Francisco. Raoul Joshi, a McKinsey consultant in
Stockholm, led the core team, which also included Stephane Phetsinorath.
We would like to thank MGI partners Susan Lund and Sree Ramaswamy in
Washington, DC, and MGI partner Jan Mischke in Zurich for their support. We
are also grateful to McKinsey and MGI colleagues for their help on analysis
and research, namely Jonathan Ablett, Jens Riis Andersen, Leon Chen,
Rita Chung, Gurneet Singh Dandona, Debadrita Dhara, Jose Pablo Garcia,
Tim Lin, Erik Rong, Daniella Seiler, and Monica Trench. We would like to thank
members of MGIs operations team, namely senior editor Janet Bush, who
helped write and edit the paper; editorial production manager Julie Philpot;
graphic design specialists Marisa Carder, Margo Shimasaki, and Patrick
White; content specialist Tim Beacom; digital editor Lauren Meling; and
Nienke Beuwer, MGI head of external communications in Europe, the Middle
East, and Africa.
We would like to thank the International Telecommunication Union, with
which we collaborated on this research. The draft version of this paper
was discussed in a range of meetings organized by the ITU and the UN
as well as other influential international seminars. We are also grateful to
Nicolas van Zeebroeck, professor of digital economics and strategy at the
Free University of Brussels and the Solvay Brussels School; and Hal Varian,
chief economist at Google.
This paper contributes to MGIs mission to help business and policy leaders
understand the forces transforming the global economy, identify strategic
locations, and prepare for the next wave of growth. As with all MGI research,
this work is independent and has not been commissioned or sponsored
in any way by any business, government, or other institution. We welcome
comments on this paper at MGI@mckinsey.com, and acknowledge that any
errors are our own.

McKinsey Global Institute

Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy

61

McKinsey Global Institute
September 2018
Copyright  McKinsey & Company
www.mckinsey.com/mgi
@McKinsey_MGI
McKinseyGlobalInstitute

