See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303311529

The Risk of Automation for Jobs in OECD Countries: A Comparative Analysis
Working Paper  May 2016

CITATIONS

READS

918

21,290

3 authors:
Melanie Arntz

Terry Gregory

ZEW - Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research

Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit

66 PUBLICATIONS 1,963 CITATIONS

34 PUBLICATIONS 1,482 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Ulrich Zierahn
Utrecht University
26 PUBLICATIONS 1,403 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Technology and Jobs in the Fourth Industrial Revolution View project

Female Labor Force Participation View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Terry Gregory on 18 May 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Please cite this paper as:

Arntz, M., T. Gregory and U. Zierahn (2016), The Risk of
Automation for Jobs in OECD Countries: A Comparative
Analysis, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working
Papers, No. 189, OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlz9h56dvq7-en

OECD Social, Employment and Migration
Working Papers No. 189

The Risk of Automation for
Jobs in OECD Countries
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS

Melanie Arntz, Terry Gregory,
Ulrich Zierahn

JEL Classification: J20, J23, J24

For Official Use

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15

Organisation de Coopration et de Dveloppement conomiques
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

___________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________
English - Or. English
DIRECTORATE FOR EMPLOYMENT, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS

EMPLOYMENT, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
For Official Use
THE RISK OF AUTOMATION FOR JOBS IN OECD COUNTRIES:A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS.
OECD SOCIAL, EMPLOYMENT AND MIGRATION WORKING PAPERS No. 189

By Melanie Arntz (ZEW Mannheim and University of Heidelberg),
Terry Gregory (ZEW Mannheim) and Ulrich Zierahn (ZEW Mannheim)

JEL Classification: J20, J23, J24

Authorised for publication by Stefano Scarpetta, Director, Directorate for Employment, Labour and Social
Affairs.

All Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers are now available through the OECD website
at www.oecd.org/els/workingpapers
English - Or. English

Complete document available on OLIS in its original format
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of
international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15

DIRECTORATE FOR EMPLOYMENT, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS
www.oecd.org/els

OECD SOCIAL, EMPLOYMENT AND MIGRATION
WORKING PAPERS
www.oecd.org/els/workingpapers

OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or of its
member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are those of the author(s).
Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progress by the author(s) and are
published to stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD works. Comments on
Working Papers are welcomed, and may be sent to the Directorate for Employment, Labour and Social
Affairs OECD, 2 rue Andr-Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France.
This series is designed to make available to a wider readership selected labour market, social policy
and migration studies prepared for use within the OECD. Authorship is usually collective, but principal
writers are named. The papers are generally available only in their original language  English or French 
with a summary in the other.
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory,
city or area.

Applications for permission to reproduce or translate
all or part of this material should be made to:
Head of Publications Service
OECD
2, rue Andr-Pascal
75775 Paris, CEDEX 16
France
Copyright OECD 2016

2

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper was commissioned by the Director of the OECDs Directorate for Employment, Labour
and Social Affairs as part of OECDs work on the future of work.
Melanie Arntz is Junior Professor at the University of Heidelberg and provisional head of the
Research Department Labour Markets, Human Resources and Social Policy at the Centre for European
Economic Research (ZEW) in Mannheim.
Terry Gregory and Ulrich Zierahn are Senior Researchers at the Research Department Labour
Markets, Human Resources and Social Policy of the Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW) in
Mannheim.
The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful comments by Holger Bonin and financial support by the
OECD.

3

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
SUMMARY

In recent years, there has been a revival of concerns that automation and digitalisation might after all
result in a jobless future. The debate has been fuelled by studies for the US and Europe arguing that a
substantial share of jobs is at risk of computerisation. These studies follow an occupation-based
approach proposed by Frey and Osborne (2013), i.e. they assume that whole occupations rather than single
job-tasks are automated by technology. As we argue, this might lead to an overestimation of job
automatibility, as occupations labelled as high-risk occupations often still contain a substantial share of
tasks that are hard to automate.
Our paper serves two purposes. Firstly, we estimate the job automatibility of jobs for 21 OECD
countries based on a task-based approach. In contrast to other studies, we take into account the
heterogeneity of workers tasks within occupations. Overall, we find that, on average across the 21 OECD
countries, 9 % of jobs are automatable. The threat from technological advances thus seems much less
pronounced compared to the occupation-based approach. We further find heterogeneities across OECD
countries. For instance, while the share of automatable jobs is 6 % in Korea, the corresponding share is
12 % in Austria. Differences between countries may reflect general differences in workplace organisation,
differences in previous investments into automation technologies as well as differences in the education of
workers across countries.
The second purpose of this paper is to critically reflect on the recent line of studies that generate
figures on the risk of computerisation and to provide a comprehensive discussion on possible adjustment
processes of firms and workers to automation and digitalisation. In particular, we argue that the estimated
share of jobs at risk must not be equated with actual or expected employment losses from technological
advances for three reasons. First, the utilisation of new technologies is a slow process, due to economic,
legal and societal hurdles, so that technological substitution often does not take place as expected. Second,
even if new technologies are introduced, workers can adjust to changing technological endowments by
switching tasks, thus preventing technological unemployment. Third, technological change also generates
additional jobs through demand for new technologies and through higher competitiveness.
The main conclusion from our paper is that automation and digitalisation are unlikely to destroy large
numbers of jobs. However, low qualified workers are likely to bear the brunt of the adjustment costs as the
automatibility of their jobs is higher compared to highly qualified workers. Therefore, the likely challenge
for the future lies in coping with rising inequality and ensuring sufficient (re-)training especially for low
qualified workers.

4

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
RSUM

Ces dernires annes, les craintes que lautomatisation et la numrisation aboutissent finalement  un
futur sans emploi se sont rveilles. Le dbat a t aliment par des tudes sur les tats-Unis et lEurope
arguant quune grande partie des emplois taient en  risque dinformatisation . Ces tudes utilisent une
mthode base sur les professions propose par Frey et Osborne (2013), cest--dire quelles supposent que
les professions dans leur ensemble et non les tches isoles sont automatises. Comme nous lavanons,
cette hypothse peut mener  la surestimation de lautomatisation des emplois, puisque les professions
dites  haut risque comprennent souvent une part substantielle de tches difficiles  automatiser.
Notre article a un double objectif. Dune part, nous estimons par une approche base sur les tches la
possibilit dautomatiser les emplois pour 21 pays de lOCDE. A la diffrence dautres tudes, nous
prenons en compte lhtrognit des tches au sein des professions. Globalement, nous estimons que 9 %
des emplois sont automatisables en moyenne dans les 21 pays de lOCDE. La menace gnre par les
avances technologiques semble donc bien moindre que celle donne par la mthode base sur les
professions. Nous trouvons galement que les pays de lOCDE sont htrognes en la matire. Par
exemple, alors que la part des emplois automatisables reprsente 6 % en Core, elle slve  12 % en
Autriche. Les diffrences entre pays peuvent tre le reflet des diversits concernant lorganisation du lieu
de travail en gnral, des diffrences dans les investissements faits auparavant dans les technologies
dautomatisation ou encore des variations dans les niveaux dducation des travailleurs.
Le second objectif de cet article est de procder  une rflexion critique sur un groupe dtudes
rcentes qui produisent des chiffres sur le  risque dinformatisation  et de fournir une discussion
approfondie sur les processus possibles dadaptation  lautomatisation et  la numrisation pour les
entreprises comme pour les travailleurs. En particulier, nous avanons que lestimation de la part des
 emplois  risque  ne doit pas tre assimile aux pertes demplois effectives ou prvues lies aux
avances technologiques. Dune part, lutilisation de nouvelles technologies est un processus long, ralenti
par les obstacles conomiques, lgaux et sociaux, de telle sorte que souvent la substitution technologique
ne seffectue pas comme prvu. Dautre part, mme si des changements technologiques sont introduits, les
travailleurs peuvent sy adapter en changeant leurs tches, de manire  prvenir le chmage
technologique. Enfin, le changement technologique gnre aussi des emplois supplmentaires lis  la
demande pour les nouvelles technologies et  laccroissement de la comptitivit.
La conclusion principale de notre article est quil est peu probable que lautomatisation et la
numrisation dtruisent un grand nombre demplois. Cependant, les travailleurs peu qualifis souffriront
plus des cots dajustement car leur emploi est davantage susceptible dtre automatis que pour les
travailleurs qualifis. Ainsi, le dfi futur consiste probablement  faire face  la croissance des ingalits et
 veiller  former (ou former  nouveau) les travailleurs peu qualifis.

5

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................................................................7
THE THREAT OF AUTOMATION ACCORDING TO FREY AND OSBORNE .......................................9
AUTOMATIBILITY OF JOBS IN OECD COUNTRIES  A TASK-BASED APPROACH .....................11
A.
B.
C.

Data and Methodology ....................................................................................................................12
Results for the US ...........................................................................................................................14
Results for other OECD countries...................................................................................................15

INTERPRETATION AND CRITIQUE ........................................................................................................21
A.
B.
C.

Overestimation of technological capabilities and its lagging utilisation .........................................21
Adjustment of workplace tasks .......................................................................................................23
Macroeconomic adjustment and indirect effects.............................................................................23

CONCLUSIONS ...........................................................................................................................................25
ANNEXES ....................................................................................................................................................29
ANNEX A. Descriptive Statistics and Variable Definitions .....................................................................29
ANNEX B. Estimation results ...................................................................................................................30
ANNEX C. Detailed Results by OECD Countries ....................................................................................33

6

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
INTRODUCTION

1.
In the past, technological change often stoked fears that new technological means displace
workers, hence giving rise to what has been called technological unemployment (see Mokyr et al., 2015 for
a comprehensive review of the literature). While such fears have not proven true for past technological
advances in the 19th and 20th century as the creation of new jobs usually outran the labour-saving impact
of the adoption of new technologies, fears have recently been growing again that technological advances in
the field of automation and digitalisation may after all herald the End of Work, as has already been
proposed by Rifkin (1995). The underlying notion is that automation and digitalisation are increasingly
penetrating the domain of tasks that until recently used to be genuinely human such as reasoning, sensing
and deciding. In a widely discussed book, Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014) present numerous examples of
what they call The Second Machine Age such as the driverless car, the largely autonomous smart
factory, service robots or 3D printing. These technologies are driven by advances in computing power,
robotics and artificial intelligence and ultimately redefine what type of human capabilities machines are
able to do.
2.
Hence, at least in the public debate, the prevalent perception seems to be that the substitutability
of humans by machines reaches a new and unprecedented quality. Such fears have also been fuelled by a
study conducted by Frey and Osborne (2013) that tries to estimate the susceptibility of employment to
computerisation. In this widely cited paper, they classify occupations in the US with respect to the risk of
being susceptible to automation by asking experts about the technological potential for automation in the
near future. As a result, the study suggests that 47% of all persons employed in the US are working in jobs
that could be performed by computers and algorithms within the next 10 to 20 years. Several follow-up
studies applied the risk of automation at the level of occupations to other countries, thereby assuming that
the risk of automation for a particular occupation is comparable across countries. Hence, cross-country
differences in the estimated share of workers that are prone to automation are driven by differences in the
occupational structure only. With this approach, Pajarinen and Rouvinen (2014) estimate the share of jobs
that are susceptible to automation to be around 35% in Finland while Brzeski and Burk (2015) estimate the
share of jobs at risk of automation to be as high as 59% in Germany. Bowles (2014) finds the share of jobs
that are susceptible to automation in Europe to range between 45 to more than 60%, with southern
European workforces facing the highest exposure to a potential automation.
3.
Given these numbers, the potential for automation is perceived as a threat that will ultimately
foster technological unemployment. However, the study by Frey and Osborne (2013) has also spurred a
discussion about the interpretation of these results. In particular, one critique targets the fact that
automation usually aims at automating certain tasks rather than whole occupations. Since occupations
usually consist of performing a bundle of tasks not all of which may be easily automatable (Autor 2014,
2015), the potential for automating entire occupations and workplaces may be much lower than suggested
by the approach followed by Frey and Osborne. Moreover, even within occupations, the heterogeneity of
tasks performed at different workplaces appears to be huge as recently shown by Autor and Handel (2013).
In fact, most of the adjustment to the past computerisation occurred through changing task structures
within occupations, rather than changing employment shares between occupations (Spitz-Oener 2006).
4.
A second critique aims at confounding the potential for automation with actual employment
losses. In particular, the technical possibility to use machines rather than humans for the provision of
certain tasks need not mean that the substitution of humans by machines actually takes place. In many
cases, there are legal as well as ethical obstacles that may prevent such a substitution or at least
substantially slow down its pace. Moreover, the substitution may not be reasonable from an economic

7

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
point of view. However, even in the absence of such obstacles, workers may adjust to a new division of
labour between machines and humans by switching tasks.
5.
The aim of this study is to estimate the risk of automation for jobs in 21 OECD countries 1 based
on the approach by Frey and Osborne (2013), while relaxing one of their major assumptions as in our
earlier study for Germany (Bonin et al. 2015). Rather than assuming that it is occupations that are
displaced by machines, we argue that it is certain tasks that can be displaced. To the extent that bundles of
tasks differ across countries and also within occupations, occupations at risk of being automated according
to Frey and Osborne may well be less prone to automation when considering the fact that most occupations
contain tasks that are difficult to substitute at least in the foreseeable future.
6.
In this paper, we re-estimate the share of jobs at risk of automation for 21 OECD countries
including the US using a task-based approach. For this purpose, we use the recently released PIACC
database (Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies) that surveys task structures
across OECD countries. Overall, we find the share of jobs at risk of automation to be, on average across
OECD countries, 9 %. However, these numbers may be limited in informing us about the potential impact
of technological advances. In particular, the paper discusses several reasons why these numbers may still
not be equated with actual expected employment losses from technological advances.
7.
We find that applying a task-based approach results in a much lower risk of automation
compared to the occupation-based approach. For instance, while Frey and Osborne find that 47 % of US
jobs are automatable, our corresponding figure is only 9 %. The threat from technological advances is thus
much less pronounced compared to the occupation-based approach by Frey and Osborne. This substantial
difference is driven by the fact that even in occupations that Frey and Osborne considered to be in the high
risk category, workers at least to some extent also perform tasks that are difficult to automate such as tasks
involving face-to-face interaction.
8.
As a final result, we find heterogeneities across OECD countries. For instance, while the share of
automatable jobs is 6 % in Korea, the corresponding rate is 12 % in Austria. As we show, parts of the
differences across countries may reflect general differences in workplace organisation, differences in
previous investments into automation technologies as well as differences in the education of workers
across countries.

1.

We estimate the automatibility for all countries which are included in the currently available PIAAC data,
excluding Russia.

8

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
THE THREAT OF AUTOMATION ACCORDING TO FREY AND OSBORNE

9.
With their analysis of the susceptibility of jobs to computerisation, FO (from now on referring to
Frey and Osborne 2013) started a controversial discussion about the potential threats from current and
future technological advances. In the public debate, their result that 47% of all US jobs might be at risk of
being automated in the near future clearly stoked fears that technological unemployment is likely to affect
a large and increasing share of the population. Yet, in order to actually interpret these results correctly, it is
important to better understand their empirical approach in the first place.
10.
FO focus on the technological advances in what they call Machine Learning (ML) and Mobile
Robotics (MR). Their starting point is the assumption that these advances differ from previous
technological advances in that the technological capabilities to perform tasks that have until recently been
considered genuinely human are increasing rapidly. In particular, these tasks are no longer confined to
routine tasks as has been the assumption of most studies in labour economics in the past decade (see
Acemoglu and Autor, 2011, and Autor, 2013, for reviews of the literature). Instead, machines are
increasingly capable of performing non-routine cognitive tasks such as driving or legal writing. In
particular, advances in the field of Machine Learning (ML, e.g. computational statistics and vision, data
mining, artificial intelligence) allow for automating cognitive tasks, while the use of ML in Mobile
Robotics (MR) also allows for automating certain manual tasks.
11.
FO argue that due to these advances, creative destruction, i.e. technological unemployment as a
result of workers seeking new jobs after being laid off, is likely to exceed what has been called the
capitalization effect (Aghion and Howitt 1994). The latter effect refers to the growth-enhancing and
ultimately job-creating effect of technological advances that in the past apparently outweighed the initial,
labour-saving effect of technology. Since the current speed with which human labour becomes potentially
obsolete is high and even increasing, attempts to upgrade skills and education may no longer suffice to win
the Race Against the Machines as titled by Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011). Hence, unprecedented
levels of technological unemployment may arise. The only domain of tasks that according to FO appears to
be exempt from this threat, is related to what they call Engineering Bottlenecks. Such bottlenecks refer to
tasks that cannot be substituted by machines in the near future as these tasks cannot be defined in terms of
codifiable rules and thus algorithms.
12.
One of these bottlenecks refers to tasks that are related to perception and manipulation, especially
when such tasks are performed in unstructured situations. The capability of workers in handling objects in
such contexts is still a huge challenge for engineers. In particular, humans are likely to have long-lasting
comparative advantages when it comes to orienting oneself in complex situations and to react to potential
failures and unstructured challenges.
13.
Other tasks that are likely to remain the domain of humans are related to creativity and social
intelligence. According to FO, creativity is the ability to develop new and meaningful ideas or artefacts
such as new concepts, theories, literature, or musical compositions. Although certain parts of these tasks
might be automatable to some extent, FO consider true creativity that relates these new ideas to the cultural
and contemporary context of changing societal perceptions as a domain that is likely to be dominated by
humans in the foreseeable future. Similarly, tasks that necessitate social intelligence, i.e. the ability to
intelligently and empathically respond to a human counterpart, remain a highly challenging domain from
an engineering point of view. Tasks such as persuading, negotiating or caring for others are thus likely to
remain genuinely human even in the long run.

9

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
14.
Against this background, FO discuss the task model of Autor et al. (2003) that considers a
constant return to scale aggregate production function with two types of labour inputs: Routine tasks that
are technically substitutable by capital and non-routine tasks that are not substitutable. FO adapt this model
by redefining the domain of tasks that are susceptible to automation and those that, due to the engineering
bottlenecks, are not. Hence, tasks that could potentially be automated go beyond the routine tasks as
defined in Autor et al. (2003), reflecting new advances in ML and MR.
15.
An important difference between the task model as used by Autor et al. (2003) and FO is that the
former discuss the substitution of routine tasks by machines as a result of profit maximising firms. Hence,
whether substitution takes place hinges not only on technological capabilities, but on the relative price of
performing tasks by either humans or machines. In contrast, FO only assess the technical capability of
substituting a certain tasks by machines and not its economic feasibility.
16.
In order to identify the capability of substituting occupations with machines, their empirical
analysis is based on the 2010 version of the O*NET data. This database contains information about the
task content of 903 occupations in the US and is based on the assessment of labour market analysts as well
as experts and workers in a particular occupation. In order to merge wage and employment data to these
occupations, FO aggregate the 903 O*NET occupations to 702 occupations of the Labour Departments
Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) by taking the mean of the tasks as reported in the O*NET data
whenever occupations had to be aggregated.
17.
Afterwards, they ask ML researchers in the context of a workshop at Oxford University
Engineering Sciences Department to classify occupations into being either automatable or not based on the
reported task structures.2 From this classification purpose, they select only 70 occupations whose labelling
the experts were highly confident about. FO then impute the automatibility to the remaining 632
occupations by proceeding as follows. First, they examine whether this subjective classification is
systematically related to nine objective attributes of the occupations that are related to the identified
engineering bottlenecks (e.g. manual dexterity, originality, social perceptiveness). These bottleneck-tasks
were defined only after the workshop and had not been part of the occupational task structures that formed
the basis for the experts assessment. FO then estimate various variants of a probabilistic model to examine
the power of these bottleneck-related attributes in predicting an occupations automatibility. They repeat
this exercise with 100 randomly selected subsamples of the 70 classified occupations and find a high
predictive power of these attributes for the subjective assessment of each occupations automatibility.
18.
The model estimates are used to predict the probability with which each of the 632 occupations
that had not been assessed by the experts could potentially be automated. FO then distinguish between low
risk (less than 30%), medium risk (30-70%) and high-risk (>70%) occupations. Combining this
information with the number of employees in each occupation in the US, as reported for 2010 by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, FO infer that 47% of all jobs in the US are in the high risk category, meaning
that associated occupations are potentially automatable over some unspecified number of years, maybe a
decade or two (FO 2013, p. 38). According to this, it is especially service, sales and office jobs that fall in
the high-risk category, see Figure 1. Beyond high-risk occupations, FO assume that automation will take
place at a much lower pace as the engineering bottlenecks have to be resolved first. Moreover, they find
that the risk of automation is higher for low-skilled workers and for low-wage occupations, suggesting that
automation could disproportionately affect these groups of workers.

2.

Experts were asked: Can the tasks of this job be sufficiently specified conditional on the availability of big
data, to be performed by state of the art computer-controlled equipment (Frey and Osborne, 2013: 30)

10

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
19.
Although FO repeatedly stress that they focus on technological capabilities only, their results of
jobs being at risk of automation and the follow-up studies by other scholars (see next section) set off a
heated debate about the potential threats from technological advances. Yet, there are many reasons why the
automatiblity of jobs might not resolve in actual job losses. Besides several other reasons (see Section
Interpretation and Critique), one main factor that FO leave aside is that it is usually not an occupation,
but rather a certain task that can be automated or not, i.e. it is tasks rather than occupations that are at risk.
In the next section, we therefore provide an alternative approach to estimate the risk of automation for 21
OECD countries based on the actual task content of jobs.
Figure 1. US Employment by Risk Category (Frey/Osborne 2013, p.37)

Source: Frey and Osborne (2013), The Future of Employment: How Susceptible are Jobs to Computerization? University of Oxford.

11

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
AUTOMATIBILITY OF JOBS IN OECD COUNTRIES  A TASK-BASED APPROACH

20.
Below, we transfer the automatibility as provided by FO to other OECD countries. Some authors
have done this by assuming that occupations in the studied countries are comparable to US occupations. In
order to derive similar automation scenarios as in FO, they directly transferred the automatibility as
reported by FO at the occupational level to occupation-specific employment data in Germany (Brzeski and
Burk 2015), Finland (Pajarinen and Rouvinen 2014) or European Countries (Bowles 2014). We refer to
this method as the occupation-based approach. A main drawback of the occupation-based approach is that
it assumes occupations to be similar across countries. Moreover, direct correspondences between the
occupational classifications of these countries and the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) of the
US typically do not exist. Finally, FO assume that occupations can be automated, assuming that workers
within the same occupation have identical task structures. However, workers task structures differ
remarkably within occupations (Autor and Handel 2013). Hence, even within occupations, workers likely
are very differently exposed to automation depending on the tasks they perform. Therefore, we follow an
alternative task-based approach that copes with these issues. In short, we estimate the relevance of tasks for
the automatibility of jobs in the US and use this empirical relationship to transfer the automatibility to
other OECD countries. In the remainder of the chapter, we first present the data and methodology. Then,
we present the results of the task-based approach for the US, before transferring the automatibility to other
OECD countries.
A. Data and Methodology
21.
In this paper, we follow a task-based approach to transfer the results by FO to other OECD
countries. The approach is based on the idea that the automatibility of jobs ultimately depends on the tasks
which workers perform for these jobs, and how easily these tasks can be automated. We therefore estimate
the relationship between workplace tasks in the US and the automatibility by FO. We then use this
statistical relationship to transfer the automatibility to jobs in other OECD countries. At first sight, this
procedure has some similarities with the analysis of FO, who estimate how the experts assessment of the
automatibility at the occupational level is related to some bottleneck-tasks, to transfer these results to other
occupations. However, while they use only a limited set of bottleneck-tasks that reflect average task
structures at the occupational level, we rely on individual survey data regarding a comprehensive list of
tasks that people actually perform at their workplace. Using individual-level data, we thus take into
account that individuals within the same occupation often perform quite different tasks. Moreover, the task
structures are self-reported by the individuals and thus likely a better indicator of workers actual tasks.
22.
The analysis is based on data from the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult
Competencies (PIAAC). The PIAAC data is a unique data source which contains micro-level indicators on
socio-economic characteristics, skills, job-related information, job-tasks and competencies. Most
importantly, the data is comparable across the countries in the program. Hence, the data also allows for
relaxing the assumption that task structures are the same across countries.
23.
To implement our task-based approach, we estimate the relationship between workers tasks and
the automatibility of jobs in the US. For this we match the automatibility indicator by FO to the US
observations in the PIAAC data based on the occupational codes. As only 2-digit ISCO codes are available
in the PIAAC, an assignment problem arises. We therefore assign multiple values of the automatibility to
each individual in the PIAAC data and follow a multiple imputation approach. For each individual in the
PIACC data, we identify the automatibility with the highest probability based on this method. In particular,
we follow Ibrahim (1990) and implement the following Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm:

12

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
(1) In a first step, we regress the automatibility y on the N characteristics x of the jobs:


 =    + 
=1

where i are the individuals in the PIAAC-data and j are the duplicates of these individuals, since multiple
automatibilities yij are assigned to each individual i. n are the parameters to be estimated, which represent
the influence of the job-related characteristics on the automatibility of each job. The automatibility is
restricted to the interval 0% to 100%. We use the Generalized Linear Model (GLM) by Papke and
Wooldridge (1996) where the dependent variable of the model is transferred to a non-restricted interval. In
addition, we take into account two weights which we connect multiplicatively. The first weight is
necessary, because we have duplicated the individuals in the dataset. This weight is therefore constructed
such that it sums to unity for each individual. For the initial step of the algorithm, we set this weight to the
inverse number of duplicates of each individual. The second weight is the replication weight of the PIAAC
data.
(2) In a second step, we predict the automatibility yi . Note that these values do not vary within individuals,
as the job-related characteristics xin are constant within individuals. By comparing the automatibilities yij
and the predicted automatibility yi we can determine the likelihood that yij , given the job-related
characteristics xin and the estimated model, is the true automatibility. Based on this likelihood, we
recalculate the first weight and continue with step 1 (see Ibrahim 1990).3 We run this algorithm until the
weights converge.
24.
We implement this model for employed individuals based on US observations in the PIAAC
data, excluding armed forces and individuals with missing occupational information or individuals whose
occupation is available only at the 1-digit ISCO level. Our explanatory variables mostly cover indicators of
workplace tasks, but we further consider gender, education, competences, income, sector, firm-size and
further auxiliary variables. The explanatory variables and their descriptive statistics are outlined in Table 2
in Annex A. Variable definitions can also be found in Annex A. The model and estimated parameters then
show the influence of the explanatory variables on the automatibility in the US. We then apply this model
and the estimated parameters to the PIAAC data in other OECD countries to predict the automatibility for
these countries.
25.
Through this procedure, we take into account that not whole occupations, but specific jobs are
exposed to automatibility, depending on the tasks performed at these particular jobs. The procedure is
based on the idea that jobs with larger shares of automatable tasks are more exposed to automatibility than
jobs with larger shares of non-automatable tasks (bottlenecks, using the wording of FO). The procedure
allows for differences in task-structures within occupations and specifically focuses on the individual job.
This approach is less restrictive than the occupation-based approach, which relies on the assumption that
occupational task structures are identical in the US and other countries. However, with this procedure we
assume that workers with the same task structure face the same automatibility in all OECD countries. Any
differences of automatibilities between the countries then originate from differences in task structures or
other explanatory variables between the countries.

3.

More precisely, the first weights  are calculated as  =


(

 | , )
=1 (


 | , )

where f(.) is the standard

normal density. This is based on equation 3.4 in Ibrahim (1990) and follows from Bayes theorem. Note that
Ibrahim (1990) presents the EM algorithm for the case of missing explanatory variables, but the procedure
can also be applied to missing dependent variables, as in our case.

13

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
B. Results for the US
26.
We present the main results for the US below, the detailed results of our model can be found in
Annex B. Overall, we find that the automatibility of jobs is lower in jobs with high educational job
requirements or jobs which require cooperation with other employees or where people spend more time on
influencing others. Hence, the low-risk tasks partially reflect what FO called engineering bottlenecks. The
automatibility is higher in jobs with a high share of tasks that are related to exchanging information, selling
or using fingers and hands. This resembles the evidence from the task-based literature which argues that
so-called routine tasks are subject to automation, whereas interactive or cognitive tasks are less likely to be
substituted by machines and computers (see Acemoglu and Autor (2011) or Autor (2013) for an overview
of the literature).
27.
Figure 2 compares the predicted automatibility of jobs in the US using the PIAAC data when
applying the task- and the occupation-based approach. For the occupation-based approach, we matched all
potential FO-values to each individual in the US-PIAAC-data based on the 2-digit ISCO occupation.4 The
result strongly resembles the bi-polar structure which is known from FO and shown in Figure 1  the
majority of jobs is assigned either a very high or a very low automatibility, only few jobs have a medium
automatibility. In contrast, the result from the task-based approach show a very different pattern  the two
poles of the distribution move to less extreme values of the automatibility. Hence, fewer jobs have either
very high or very low values of automatibility when taking into account the variation of task-structures
within occupations. As a result, only 9% of all individuals in the US face a high automatibility, i.e. an
automatibility of at least 70%. This figure stands in contrast to FO, who argue that 47% of US jobs are at
high risk of being automated. Apparently, not taking account of the variation of tasks within occupations
exerts a huge impact on the estimated automatibility of jobs. This is because even in occupations that FO
expect to be at a high risk of automation, people often perform tasks which are hard to automate, such as
for example interactive tasks (e.g. group work or face-to-face interactions with customers, clients, etc.).
This can be illustrated by two examples:


According to FO, people working in the occupation Bookkeeping, Accounting, and Auditing
Clerks (SOC code: 43-3031) face an automation potential of 98%. However, only 24% of all
employees in this occupation can perform their job with neither group work nor face-to-face
interactions.



According to FO, people working in the occupation Retail Salesperson (SOC code 41-2031)
face an automation potential of 92%. Despite this, only 4% of retail salespersons perform their
jobs with neither both group work nor face-to-face interactions. 5

4.

For the occupation-based approach, we matched all potential FO-values to each individual in the USPIAAC-data based on the 2-digit ISCO occupation. Each individual is assigned multiple FO-values due to
the assignment problem. We equally weight each observation within each individual.

5.

These results are based on the Princeton Data Improvement Initiative (PDII). We rely on this data rather
than the PIAAC, because in the PDII 6-digit SOC codes are available, which allows us to circumvent the
assignment problem.

14

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Figure 2. Distribution of Automatibility in the US (Task-Based vs. Occupation-Based Approach)

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

28.
In conclusion, using information on task-usage at the individual level leads to significantly lower
estimates of jobs at risk, since workers in occupations with  according to FO  high automatibilities
nevertheless often perform tasks which are hard to automate.
C. Results for other OECD countries
29.
Figure 3 3 shows the share of workers at high risk by OECD countries, i.e. the share of workers
whose automatibility is at least 70%. This share is highest in Germany and Austria (12%), while it is
lowest in Korea and Estonia (6%).6 The results for Germany are very similar to the results of a recent
representative survey among German employees, where 13 % of employees consider it likely or highly
likely that their job will be replaced by machines (BMAS 2016). Furthermore, our results for Germany are
comparable to a recent study by Dengler and Matthes (2015), who use a different methodological approach
but also find that 15% of all jobs in Germany are at risk of automation. Moreover, they also find a bi-polar
distribution of automatibility with moderate polarisation.

6.

We exclude the Russian Federation from our sample. This is because when we restrict the Russian PIAAC
sample to those observations where all relevant variables are non-missing, then the distribution of these
variables is not representative. The results for Canada should be treated with some caution, as relevant
explanatory variables for extrapolating the automatibility are missing, see Annex B.

15

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Figure 3. Share of Workers with High Automatibility by OECD Countries

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

30.
An interesting result from Figure 3 is that the distribution of automatibility across countries does
not lend itself to an immediate interpretation of potential underlying factors. To gain deeper insights into
the underlying reasons for these country differences, we decompose the difference of the share of workers
at high risk between each country and the US into a within- and between-industry component regarding
three dimensions: industry, occupation, and education.7 In each case, the between-component reflects the
difference in automatibility that is due to the cross-country difference in industry, occupation or
educational structure, while the within-component reflects the difference in automatibility that is due to the
fact that workers in the same industries, occupations, or education group perform more (or fewer)
automatable tasks.
31.
The results in Table 1 show that differences in industry and occupational structures explain only
little of the differences in the share of workers at high risk between each country and the US, as the
between-industry and -occupation components matter only little for most countries. Instead, workers in the
same industries and occupations perform differently automatable tasks in these countries than workers in
the US. However, education plays a large role for many countries. In most countries, the within-education
component is negative, which implies that people with the same education typically perform less
7.

To compute the between-industry component, we first assign weights to each individual. These weights are
the same for all individuals of the same industry. We choose the weights such that the share of workers by
industry of each country resembles the US industry structure. We then recalculate the share of workers at
high risk and calculate the difference of this figure to the original share of workers at high risk in each
country. This difference resembles the between-component. The remaining difference of the country to the
US-figures then resembles the within-component.

16

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
automatable tasks compared to the US. However, in many countries the between-education component is
positive, which implies that in those countries a larger share of workers has educational levels which are
associated with more automatable tasks (i.e. low or medium qualified workers). This is because the US has
a larger share of highly educated workers, who typically perform fewer automatable tasks. These results
also hold when focusing on educational requirements of the jobs rather than actual education.8
Table 1.
Country
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom

Decomposition of Country Differences in the Share of Workers at High Risk

Difference
to the US
3.2%
-1.9%
0.4%
1.0%
-0.4%
-2.6%
-2.4%
-0.2%
3.2%
-0.7%
0.7%
-1.7%
-3.1%
0.8%
1.0%
-1.7%
1.7%
2.8%
-1.5%
1.3%

Industries
w ithin
betw een
2.7%
-1.6%
0.3%
-0.2%
0.1%
-3.0%
-2.9%
-0.3%
3.6%
-0.6%
0.2%
-1.7%
-2.8%
0.9%
1.6%
-3.3%
1.2%
2.5%
-1.0%
2.1%

Occupations
w ithin
betw een

0.6%
-0.3%
0.0%
1.3%
-0.5%
0.4%
0.6%
0.1%
-0.4%
-0.1%
0.5%
-0.1%
-0.3%
-0.1%
-0.6%
1.6%
0.6%
0.3%
-0.5%
-0.8%

3.3%
-1.1%
1.3%
-0.8%
-0.2%
-1.4%
-3.3%
-0.3%
2.0%
-0.5%
0.7%
-2.5%
-3.6%
1.2%
1.4%
-2.7%
2.0%
2.3%
-1.5%
0.1%

-0.1%
-0.7%
-0.9%
1.8%
-0.2%
-1.2%
0.9%
0.1%
1.2%
-0.2%
0.0%
0.8%
0.6%
-0.4%
-0.4%
1.0%
-0.2%
0.5%
0.0%
1.2%

Education
w ithin
betw een
-2.2%
-3.1%
-0.8%
-2.0%
-3.3%
-2.9%
-2.8%
-1.5%
0.1%
0.0%
-3.7%
-0.8%
-1.7%
-4.9%
-3.4%
-1.8%
-0.2%
-1.4%
-4.1%
-1.3%

5.5%
1.2%
1.2%
3.0%
2.9%
0.3%
0.4%
1.4%
3.1%
-0.7%
4.4%
-0.9%
-1.4%
5.7%
4.4%
0.1%
2.0%
4.1%
2.6%
2.6%

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

32.
As an example, in Austria, workers perform typically fewer automatable tasks compared to USworkers with the same educational level, but Austria has a higher share of low- and medium-skilled
workers which perform more automatable tasks. Since the latter effect dominates, Austria has on aggregate
a larger share of workers at high risk. In Korea, in contrast, both effects are negative, which implies that
Koreans both perform fewer automatable tasks at each educational level compared to the US, and a larger
share of Korean workers achieved educational levels which are associated with fewer automatable tasks
compared to the US.
33.
Hence, we can conclude that cross-country differences often reflect that individuals in the same
industry, occupation or even education group perform different tasks. But what might be the reason behind
such differences? In the following, we aim to briefly discuss two potential explanations: (1) general
differences in the workplace organisation, and (2) differences in the adoption of new technologies.
34.
In order to illustrate the first reason, consider, for example, two countries A and B which have
adopted comparable technologies. The automatibility might nevertheless be higher in country A than in
country B, because workplace organisation in country A generally relies less on group work or face-to-face
interactions than country B. This is illustrated in Figure 4, which shows the relationship between the share
8.

Results are available upon request.

17

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
of people at high risk and the incidence of communication tasks at the country level. On average, countries
which have a stronger focus on communicative tasks in their workplace organisation also have a lower
share of jobs at high risk. For instance, jobs in Italy and Germany show low degrees of communication,
whereas jobs in the US and UK are more communicative. Overall, the analysis shows that genuine
differences in workplace organisation are relevant for differences in automatibilities between countries.
Figure 4. Automatibility and Communicating

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

35.
To illustrate the second reason, assume that there are no genuine differences in the workplace
organisation of countries A and B. The automatibility of country A might still be higher than in country B,
because country B invests stronger in new automation technologies and has hence already replaced labour
by capital for performing the automatable tasks. Indeed, the automatibility is lower in countries which
already invest a lot in ICT (see Figure 5). Hence, a high automatibility may reflect an unused potential for
automation. Whether an extended use of automation technologies comes with beneficial or adverse effects
on workers is unclear ex ante.

18

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Figure 5. ICT Investments and Automatibility

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

36.
Overall, we can conclude that comparing the automatibilities between countries is not
straightforward and necessitates further insights into a countrys adoption of new technologies, its
economic and educational structure, its workplace organisation and the resulting task structures. Education
and in particular the educational structure of the workers seem to play a large role. Countries with a strong
focus on high qualified workers typically have lower shares of workers at high risk, since these workers
typically perform fewer automatable tasks than low qualified workers. We therefore focus on the
relationship between education and automatibility, below.
37.
Despite the cross-country differences, a main feature of all countries is that the automatibility
strongly decreases in the level of education and in the income of the workers: It is mostly low skilled and
low-income individuals who face a high risk of being automatable. This is shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7
for a weighted average9 of all OECD countries. Results for the individual countries can be found in
Annex C.

9.

The figures are based on weighted data, so that large countries have a larger influence on the results.
Nevertheless, the results are very similar when using unweighted data.

19

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Figure 6. Share of Workers with High Automatibility by Education

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

Figure 7. Share of Workers with High Automatibility by Income

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

20

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
INTERPRETATION AND CRITIQUE

38.
As discussed, FO predict that technologies allow for automating a substantial share of jobs within
the next two decades. In addition, they assume that this process continues beyond the most-prone jobs in
the medium run and ultimately affects even those that today appear to be relatively safe from automation.
As discussed in the last chapter, applying a task-based approach that takes account of the heterogeneity of
workplace tasks within occupations already strongly reduces the predicted share of jobs that are at a high
risk of automation. This deviating result clearly sounds a note of caution regarding the interpretation of
such predictions. Apparently, the mere fact that FO chose an occupation-based approach that abstracts
from within-occupation variation in the tasks performed and that transfers the expert assessments for 70
occupations to the remaining occupations based on only three engineering bottlenecks and nine related
tasks, has a strong effect on the outcome.
39.
However, even for the less restrictive task-based approach, there are good reasons to be cautious
when interpreting the results. Firstly, the approach still reflects technological capabilities based on experts
assessments rather than the actual utilisation of such technologies, which might lead an overestimation of
job automatibility. Secondly, even when new technologies are increasingly used, the effect this has on
employment prospects depends on whether workplaces adjust to a new division of labour or not. Workers
might adjust by increasingly performing tasks that are complemented by the new technologies. Thirdly, the
approach considers only existing jobs. Yet, the use of these technologies is likely to create new jobs.
Moreover, new technologies may also exert positive effects on labour demand if they raise product demand
due to an improved competitiveness and a positive effect on workers incomes. Hence, workplaces are
likely to be less at risk than suspected at first sight. In the following, we discuss these three aspects in
more detail.
A. Overestimation of technological capabilities and its lagging utilisation
40.
The experts assessing the automatibility of the 70 occupations in the FO study were asked
whether [] the tasks of this job [can] be sufficiently specified conditional on the availability of big data,
to be performed by state of the art computer-controlled equipment (Frey and Osborne, 2013: 30). It is
very likely that the resulting assessment overstates technological possibilities. First of all, experts tend to
overestimate the potential of new technologies (Autor 2014, 2015, Pfeiffer and Suphan 2015). In
particular, the comparative advantage of machines as compared to workers is typically overstated for tasks
involving flexibility, power of judgement and common sense. More generally, the classification of
occupations or tasks into the distinct domains automatable and not-automatable is problematic (Green
2012, Rohrbach-Schmidt and Tiemann 2013, Pfeiffer and Suphan 2015).10 In addition, most jobs are
probably not sufficiently well defined to be actually substituted by machines. As Pratt (2015) states for the
advances in robotics specialized robots will improve at performing well-defined tasks, but in the real
world, there are far more problems yet to be solved than ways presently known to solve them (Pratt
2015:52).

10.

Green (2012, p. 41) finds that the classification of tasks into the distinct domains routine (i.e.
automatable) and non-routine (i.e. non-automatable) using UK data. Also Rohrbach-Schmidt and
Tiemann (2013) find that the results on the effects of technological change in Germany are sensitive to the
subjective classification of tasks into either routine or non-routine. Pfeiffer and Suphan (2015, p. 11)
criticises that the reasons why specific tasks are characterized as routine or non-routine [] are not
clear. The decision process introduces a potential for circular reasoning because assignment follows an
assumption already made about the likelihood of automation.

21

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
41.
Moreover, the necessary condition for the utilisation of these technologies in terms of data and
computer availability may not be met, at least not immediately. In fact, a monitoring report on the
digitalisation of the German economy for the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs recently revealed that
the digitalisation of the manufacturing sector is still rather low and will advance only slowly until 2020
(Graumann et al. 2015). For example, a recent survey among German firms by the ZEW (2015) shows that
only 18% of all firms are familiar with the concept Industrie 4.0, which is a project put forward by the
German government to foster the digitalisation and interconnectedness of the German industry. Up to now,
only 4% of firms have started or are about to start such projects. Hence, the utilisation of technologies
clearly lags behind the technological possibilities. This may also be related to a shortage of qualified
personnel that is able to handle these new technologies, as the introduction of new technologies may
require the supply of complementary skills on the labour market (Acemoglu 1998). For example, Janssen
and Mohrenweiser (2014) investigate the introduction of the new computer-based control system
(Computerized Numerical Control, CNC) in the field of cutting machine operation into the German
apprenticeship regulation. They find that this regulatory change in the apprenticeship regulation negatively
affected workers who graduated before this regulatory change, and hence did not learn the use of the
technology in their formal training. However, only workers who switched their occupation after the change
were negatively affected, suggesting that the remaining workers learned the technology on the job. This
indicates that the technology was only implemented by firms on a large scale after the application of the
CNC technology had been introduced to the curricular of the apprenticeship training program.
42.
Furthermore, even if sufficiently qualified personnel were available, firms decide on investing in
new technologies depending on the relative factor prices of capital and labour in performing a certain task
in the production process. Although the literature on routine-biased technological change showed that the
reduction in prices for computer capital reduced the demand for routine-intensive jobs, it is not clear when
the break-even point for machines to perform more complex tasks will actually be reached. This will, of
course, also depend on the wage level which itself is endogenous and would thus react to an excess labour
supply by lowering wages, hence improving workers employment prospects again. For this reason,
technological capabilities need not translate into technological obsolescence of human labour (cf.
Acemoglu and Restrepo 2015). The empirical approach of FO clearly leaves aside many factors that
ultimately determine the decision to automate tasks and substitute human labour and that would prevent all
technological capabilities from being exhausted. Hence, FO explicitly state that their empirical approach
focusses on technological capabilities. The susceptibility of jobs to automation that they aim at identifying
hence refers to such capabilities only.
43.
Apart from company-related reasons for a rather low speed of technological adoption, there may
also be ethical or legal obstacles to the utilisation of new technologies. As a prominent example that has
recently been discussed by Thierer and Hagemann (2015) and Bonnefon et al. (2015), the autonomous car
bears new legal challenges regarding e.g. liabilities in case of an accident. Moreover, there are unresolved
ethical questions concerning how an algorithm should decide between crashing into a car or a truck. While
some of these obstacles may be resolved at some point, they clearly slow down the pace with which
technologies are spread. This can be illustrated using the example of driverless cars, which are often said to
have a high disruptive potential. According to the Boston Consulting Group (2015), the share of driverless
vehicles will reach 10% by the year 2035 which suggests a rather slow speed of change.
44.
Finally, another aspect that should be considered is a strong societal preference for the provision
of certain tasks and services by humans as opposed to machines. As an example, nursing or caring for the
elderly may remain labour-intensive sectors, even if service robots increasingly complement these
professions in the future. Hence, some human services will probably continue to command a premium
compared to robotically produced one (Pratt 2015, p. 58), meaning that there is a societal value attached
to humans performing certain tasks that tends to preserve their comparative advantage.

22

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
45.
For all these reasons, the technological capabilities as assessed by FO are likely overestimated
and should not be equated with the actual utilisation of technological advances.
B. Adjustment of workplace tasks
46.
Even if a technology actually enters the production process, the impact on employment depends
on whether workplaces are able to adjust to new demands. In particular, the new technologies may
substitute for certain tasks and complement others. Hence, whether a workplace will be automated or not
clearly depends on whether the tasks performed at a certain workplace shift from the first to the latter set of
tasks. In fact, several studies suggest that although there has been a decline in jobs with predominantly
routine and automatable tasks, the adjustment mainly takes place by changing the set of tasks within
occupations (e.g. Autor at al. 2003, Spitz-Oener 2006). Workers seem to shift worktime from routine and
automatable tasks to tasks that are complementary to machines.
47.
The adoption of new technologies seems to come along with a new division of labour where
workers increasingly perform tasks that complement machines (Autor 2013) of new and more complex
tasks (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2015). As an example, tasks involving the monitoring of machines are
likely to gain in importance. Hence, new technologies are unlikely to fully automate workplaces or
occupations on a large scale, but rather change workplaces and the tasks involved in certain occupations.
As long as workers are able to adjust to these new task demands, machines need not crowd out workers.
However, as the findings from FO as well as the predictions in chapter 3 suggest, low-qualified workers
perform a much higher share of potentially automatable tasks than high-qualified workers. If the tasks that
complement machines become increasingly complex and demanding, the employment prospects for
workers lacking certain skills may deteriorate.
C. Macroeconomic adjustment and indirect effects
48.
The risk of automation as predicted by FO refers to the (likely overestimated) threat regarding the
labour-saving impact of new technologies. This risk of automation, however, must not be equated with
employment losses since there are macroeconomic feedback mechanisms that may also result in an
increase in labour demand. Arntz et al. (2014) review the literature regarding these macroeconomic
adjustment mechanisms. In particular, there are three mechanisms that counteract the labour-saving impact
of technological advances.
49.
First of all, labour-saving technologies need to be produced in the first place, thereby creating a
demand for labour in new sectors and occupations. According to the OECD Digital Economy Outlook
(OECD 2015) the ICT sector is a key driver of economic growth in OCED countries. Between 15 and 52%
of all investments in OECD countries were related to the ICT sector between 2008 and 2013. Moreover,
after a slack in the sectors contribution to employment growth during the economic crises, the share of
jobs created by the ICT sector in OECD countries amounts to 22% in 2013. FO do not take into account
such positive demand effects. Moreover, due to focusing on the perceived risk for currently existing jobs
only, FO neglect the fact that jobs of the future are likely to be complementary to the new technologies.
50.
Secondly, new technologies may boost a firms competitiveness since new technologies typically
increase a firms productivity. With lower costs and prices, firms face a higher product demand and hence
demand more labour, which can (partially) compensate for the labour-saving effect of technologies. Graetz
and Michaels (2015), for example, examine the effect of the utilisation of industrial robots in 17 countries
and find no negative impact on the total working hours at the sector level. Hence, the use of new laboursaving technologies did not reduce the demand for labour. Similarly, Goos et al. (2014) develop a model of
labour demand at the industry level for 16 European countries and find that routine-intensive industries that
are at a higher risk of introducing labour-saving technologies gain in competitiveness and face an

23

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
increasing product demand. Similarly, Gregory et al. (2015) estimate a labour demand model at the level of
European NUTS2 regions and show that regions with an initially high share of routine and highly
automatable tasks actually gained in competitiveness, with the indirect positive effect on the regional
product demand more than compensating the labour-saving substitution effect. In total, they find that the
computerisation in fact generated 11.6 Million jobs on net across 27 European countries between 1999 and
2010.
51.
Thirdly, to the extent that the new technologies complement workers, labour productivity
increases. This may lead to either higher wages, or higher employment, or both, which in turn raises labour
income. As a consequence, these workers may demand more products and services, thereby again
increasing the demand for labour in the economy. In their labour demand model, Gregory et al. (2015) take
these adjustment processes into account and find that they played a strong role for the positive net effect of
technological change on employment in Europe. For past waves of technological innovations, several
studies suggest that workers at least in the long run benefited from technological advances in terms of
higher wages and income, although there is also evidence that there was at least a temporary increase in
income inequality related to some technological innovations (see Mokyr et al 2015 for a review). For the
recent past, Graetz and Michaels (2015) also find that the use of industrial robots at the sector level
increased both labour productivity and wages for workers. Hence, to the extent that workers benefit from
technological change in terms of higher wage income, technological progress can additionally boost labour
demand via an increase in product demand.
52.
Altogether, these macroeconomic mechanisms may compensate for the negative labour-saving
effects of new technologies, so that large job-losses remain unlikely. On the contrary, total employment
might even increase as argued above. Moreover, a recent study by Wolter et al. (2015) simulates the
potential effects of the future digitalisation on the German economy (labelled as Industry 4.0). Even
though they find only small negative effects on overall employment, their results suggests large shifts in
employment between industries and occupations. In another paper, Nordhaus (2015) develops a theory of
how new technologies can fully substitute for labour and analyses the conditions that need to be fulfilled
for labour to become obsolete. He compares these to recent indicators for the US economy and this test
suggests that the obsolescence of labour is unlikely to become relevant during this century. Hence, while
the overall employment effects of future automation are presumably small, the development of digitised
economies is likely associated with large shifts between occupations and industries, forcing workers to
adjust to the changing economic environment.

24

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
CONCLUSIONS

53.
In recent years, a series of studies have revived concerns that technological change might cause
widespread technological unemployment. Especially Frey and Osborne triggered a public debate by
claiming that 47% of US jobs are at risk of being automated. The present paper contributes to this debate
by reflecting on some of the methodological problems of these studies. In particular, we argue that one of
their major limitations is that they view occupations rather than tasks as being threatened by automation.
We therefore focus on the task-content of jobs, as workers within the same occupation often perform
different tasks. As we argue throughout this article, many workers in occupations that have been classified
as vulnerable to automation in these studies may in fact be less exposed to automation than previously
thought. The reason is that workers often perform a substantial share of non-routine interactive tasks,
which are known to be less automatable.
54.
In this paper, we therefore estimate the automatibility for 21 OECD countries following a taskbased rather than an occupation-based approach. For this, we use data on actual workplace tasks as
recently surveyed in the PIACC database for OECD countries. Overall, our figures suggest that 9 % of
OECD jobs are potentially automatable. Moreover, we find that in the US only 9% of jobs rather than 47%,
as proposed by Frey and Osborne face a high automatibility. The threat from technological advances thus
seems much less pronounced compared to studies following an occupation-based approach. We further
find heterogeneities across OECD countries: while the share of automatable jobs is 6 % in Korea, the
corresponding share is 12 % in Austria. The differences across countries may reflect general differences in
workplace organisation, differences in previous investments into automation technologies as well as
differences in the education of workers across countries.
55.
The study demonstrates the necessity to view technological change as substituting or
complementing certain tasks rather than occupations. Neglecting the differences in tasks of comparable
jobs may lead to an overestimation of job automatibility. Moreover, difference in the task structure are to a
large extend able to explain differences in the employment projections.
56.
Nevertheless, our figures should be interpreted with caution. Firstly, the approach still reflects
technological capabilities rather than the actual utilisation of such technologies, which might lead to a
further overestimation of job automatibility. Secondly, even if new technologies are increasingly adopted
in the economy, the effect on employment prospects depends on whether workplaces adjust to a new
division of labour, as workers may increasingly perform tasks that are complementary to new technologies.
Thirdly, the approach considers only existing jobs, although new technologies are likely to create also new
jobs. Moreover, new technologies may also exert positive effects on labour demand if they raise product
demand due to an improved competitiveness and a positive effect on workers incomes. Even though this
suggests that fewer workplaces are likely to be at risk than suspected, differences in automatibility
between educational levels are large. This suggests that low educated workers likely will bear the brunt of
adjustment costs to technological change in terms of requirements for further training and occupational retraining. Moreover, for this group of workers, regaining the competitive advantage over machines by
means of upskilling and training may be difficult to achieve, especially since the speed of the current
technological revolution appears to exceed the pace of its predecessors. Hence, this study clearly points
towards the need to focus more on the potential inequalities and requirements for (re-)training arising from
technological change rather than the general threat of unemployment that technological progress might or
might not cause.

25

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D. (1998), Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and
Wage Inequality, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), pp. 1055-1089.
Acemoglu, D. and D. H. Autor (2011), Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and
earnings, Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, 1043-1171.
Acemoglu, D. and P. Resrepo (2015), The Race Between Man and Machine: Implications of Technology
for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment, unpublished, December 2015.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1994), Growth and Unemployment, The Review of Economic Studies, 61(3),
pp. 477-494.
Arntz, M. and T. Gregory (2014), What Old Stagers Could Teach Us  Examining Age
Complementarities in Regional Innovation Systems, ZEW Discussion Paper, No. 14-050, Zentrum
fr Europische Wirtschaftsforschung.
Autor, D. H. (2015), Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace
Automation, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3), pp. 3-30.
Autor, D. H. (2014), Polanyi's Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth, Paper prepared for
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Jackson Hole Conference, August 22, 2014.
Autor, D. H. (2013), The task approach to labor markets: an overview, Journal for Labour Market
Research, 46(3), pp. 185-199.
Autor, D. H. and M. J. Handel (2013), Putting Tasks to the Test: Human Capital, Job Tasks, and Wages,
Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2), pp. S59-S96.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy and R. J. Murnane (2003), The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An
Empirical Exploration, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1279-1333.
Bonin, H., T. Gregory and U. Zierahn (2015), bertragung der Studie von Frey/Osborne (2013) auf
Deutschland. Kurzexpertise im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums fr Arbeit und Soziales
[Transmission of the study by Frey / Osborne (2013) on Germany. Short expertise on behalf of the
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social].
Bonnefon, J. F., A. Shariff and I. Rahwan (2015), Autonomous Vehicles Need Experimental Ethics: Are
We Ready for Utilitarian Cars?. http://arxiv.org/pdf/1510.03346.pdf .
Boston Consulting Group (2015), Back to the Future: The Road to Autonomous Driving,
http://de.slideshare.net/TheBostonConsultingGroup/the-road-to-autonomous-driving.
Bowles, J. (2014), The Computerization of European Jobs, Bruegel, Brussels.
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2011), Race Against the Machines : How the Digital Revolution is
Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the
Economy, Digital Frontier Press.

26

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014), The second machine age: work, progress, and prosperity in a time
of brilliant technologies, WW Norton & Company.
Brzeski, C. and I. Burk (2015), Die Roboter kommen. Folgen der Automatisierung fr den deutschen
Arbeitsmarkt [The Robots Come. Consequences of Automation for the German Labour Market],
ING DiBa Economic Research.
Bundesministerium fr Arbeit und Soziales (BMAS, 2016), Digitalisierung am Arbeitsplatz. Aktuelle
Ergebnisse einer Betriebs- und Beschftigtenbefragung [Digitising the Workplace. Recent Results
of a Survey of Companies and Employees], Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Berlin.
Dengler, K. and B. Matthes (2015), Folgen der Digitalisierung fr die Arbeitswelt.
Substituierbarkeitspotentiale von Berufen in Deutschland [Consequences of Digitisation for the
Working World. Substitutability Potential of Occupations in Germany], IAB Forschungsbericht
11/2015.
Frey, C. B. and M.A. Osborne (2015), Technology at Work: The Future of Innovation and Employment,
Citi GPS: Global Perspectives & Solutions, February 2015.
Frey, C.B. and M.A. Osborne (2013), The Future of Employment: How Susceptible are Jobs to
Computerization?, University of Oxford.
Goos, M., A. Manning and A. Salomons (2014), Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased
Technological Change and Offshoring, The American Economic Review, 104(8), pp. 2509-2526.
Graetz, G. and G. Michaels (2015), Robots and Work, IZA Discussion Paper, No. 8938.
Green, F. (2012), Employee involvement, technology and evolution in job skills: A task-based analysis,
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 65(1), pp. 36-67.
Gregory, T., A. Salomons, and U. Zierahn (2015). Technological Change and Regional Labor Market
Disparities in Europe, Centre for European Economic Research, Mannheim.
Graumann, S., I. Bertschek, T. Weber et al. (2015), Monitoring-Report. Wirtschaft DIGITAL 2015,
Bundesministerium fr Wirtschaft und Energie, Berlin.
Ibrahim J.G. (1990), Incomplete data in generalized linear models, Journal of the American Statistical
Association, No. 85, pp. 765-769.
Janssen, S. and J. Mohrenweiser (2014), Skill supply, technology, and wages. Evidence from regulatory
changes of mandatory training regulations, paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the
American Economic Association in San Francisco, January 3-5, 2016, MIMEO.
Mokyr, J., C. Vickers and N. L. Ziebarth (2015),The History of Technological Anxiety and the Future of
Economic Growth: Is This Time Different?, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29.3 (2015),
pp. 31-50.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2015), Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity? Information Technology and
the Future of Economic Growth, NBER Working Paper, 21547.
OECD (2015), OECD Digital Economy Outlook 2015, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264232440-en.
27

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Pajarinen, M. and P. Rouvinen (2014), Computerization Threatens One Third of Finnish Employment.
ETLA Brief, No. 22, pp. 13.
Papke, L. E. and J.D. Wooldridge (1996), Econometric Methods for Fractional Response Variables with
an Application to 401(K) Plan Participation Rates, Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 11,
pp. 619-632.
Pfeiffer, S. and A. Suphan (2015), The Labouring Capacity Index: Living Labouring Capacity and
Experience as Resources on the Road to Industry 4.0, Working Paper 2015, No. 2, University of
Hohenheim.
Pratt, G. A. (2015), Is a Cambrian Explosion Coming for Robotics?", The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 29, No. 3 (Summer 2015), pp. 51-60, American Economic Association,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43550120?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents.
Rifkin, J. (1995), The End of Work: Technology, Jobs, and Your Future, Putnam, New York.
Rohrbach-Schmidt, D. and M. Tiemann (2013), Changes in Workplace Tasks in Germany: Evaluating
Skill and Task Measures, Journal for Labour Market Research, 46(3), pp. 215-237.
Spitz-Oener, A. (2006), Technical Change, Job Tasks, and Rising Educational Demands: Looking outside
the Wage Structure, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 24, pp. 235-270.
Thierer, A. D. and R. Hagemann (2014), Removing Roadblocks to Intelligent Vehicles and Driverless
Cars, Wake Forest Journal of Law & Policy (2015), Forthcoming.
Wolter, M. I., A. Mnnig, M. Hummel et al. (2015), Industrie 4.0 und die Folgen fr Arbeitsmarkt und
Wirtschaft. Szenario-Rechnungen im Rahmen der BIBB-IAB-Qualifikations- und
Berufsfeldprojektionen [Industry 4.0 and the Consequences for the Labor Market and Economy.
Scenario Calculations as Part of the BIBB-IAB Qualifications and Occupational Field Projections].
IAB Forschungsbericht, No. 8/2015.
ZEW (2015), IKT-Report. Unternehmensbefragung zur Nutzung von Informations- und
Kommunikationstechnologien [ICT Report. Company Survey on the Use of Information and
Communication Technologies], October 2015, Zentrum fr Europische Wirtschaftsforschung,
Mannheim.

28

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
ANNEX
ANNEX A. Descriptive Statistics and Variable Definitions
Table 2.

Descriptive Statistics (unweighted)

Variable
code
gender
AGEG5LFS
education
pvlit
pvnum
pvpsl
D_Q03R
D_Q06aR
D_Q08a
D_Q12aR
D_Q12cR
D_Q16aR
G_Q04R
G_Q06R
F_Q01b
F_Q02a
F_Q02b
F_Q02c
F_Q02d
F_Q02e
F_Q03a
F_Q03b
F_Q03c
F_Q04a
F_Q04b
F_Q05a
F_Q05b
F_Q06b
F_Q06c
F_Q07a
F_Q07b
G_Q01a
G_Q01d
G_Q01e
G_Q01f
G_Q02b
G_Q02d
G_Q03c
G_Q03h
G_Q05c
G_Q05g
G_Q05h
YEARLYINCPRR

content
Gender
Agegroup
Education
Literacy
Numeracy
Problem Solving
Sector
Firm Size
Responsibility for Staff
Educational Job Requirements
Required Job Experience
Payment Scheme
Computer Use at Work
Level of Computer Use
Cooperating with Others
Exchanging Information
Training Others
Presenting
Selling
Consulting
Planning Own Activities
Planning Activities of Others
Organizing Own Schedule
Influencing
Negotiating
Solving Simple Problems
Solving Complex Problems
Working Physically for Long
Using Fingers or Hands
Not Challenged Enough
More Training Necessary
Reading Instructions
Reading Professional Publications
Reading Books
Reading Manuals
Writing Articles
Filling Forms
Calculating Shares or Percentages
Complex Math or Statistics
Internet Use for Work-Related Info
Using Programming Language
Using Communication Software
Yearly Income (Percentile)

mean
0.472
5.823
2.264
277.447
263.608
279.890
0.255
1.910
0.670
0.377
0.513
0.414
0.224
0.629
3.713
0.054
0.024
0.008
0.018
0.038
0.039
0.020
0.051
0.030
0.024
0.050
0.023
0.048
0.068
0.073
0.788
0.043
0.013
0.008
0.022
0.001
0.033
0.029
0.003
0.035
0.003
0.005
0.330

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

29

sd
0.499
2.604
0.595
44.096
50.170
39.473
0.436
0.558
0.470
0.485
0.500
0.492
0.417
0.483
1.355
0.047
0.028
0.017
0.032
0.031
0.036
0.027
0.041
0.031
0.028
0.038
0.024
0.064
0.063
0.260
0.409
0.040
0.018
0.019
0.024
0.006
0.034
0.031
0.011
0.025
0.011
0.013
0.470

min
0.000
1.000
1.000
119.735
74.333
124.798
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

max
1.000
10.000
3.000
406.088
415.966
411.289
1.000
3.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
5.000
0.784
0.269
0.198
0.476
0.342
0.500
0.333
0.500
0.267
0.226
0.597
0.280
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.476
0.172
0.323
0.240
0.072
0.330
0.329
0.163
0.269
0.103
0.089
1.000

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
57.

The variables are defined as follows:


Gender dummy: Male (0), Female (1)



Education: ISCED 0, 1, 2, 3C (short) (1), ISCED 3A-B, 3C (long), 4A-B-C, 5B (2), ISCED 5A 6
(3).



Sector-dummy: private sector (0), public sector or non-profit organisations (1)



Firm size / number of employees: 1-10 (1), 11-1000 (2), >1000 (3)



Responsibility for staff: yes (0), no (1)



Educational job requirements: ISCSED 0-4 (0), ISCED 5-6 (1)



Required work experience: less than 1 year (0), at least one year (1)



Payment scheme: piece or hourly wage or no wage (0), monthly/yearly wage (1)



Computer use at work: yes (0), no (1)



Level of computer use: simple (0), moderate or complex (1)



Not challenged enough at work: yes (0), no (1)



More training required at work: yes (0), no (1)



Yearly income (percentile rank): 0 %-10 % (1), 10 %-25 % (2), 25 %-50 % (3), 50 %-75 % (4),
75 %-90 % (5), 90 %-100 % (6).



Cooperating with others: up to a quarter of the time (0), more than a quarter of the time (1)

58.
The task-measures in the PIAAC-data are recorded by the frequency of use. We re-define these
data to calculate work-time shares. For this, we first re-define the answers into a work-time scale (e.g. we
redefine less that once a month as 1/30, less than once a week as 1/7, and so on). We then calculate the
sum of this across all tasks (for each worker) and divide each task-item by this sum. This way, we receive
the share of work time spent on each individual task (assuming that the tasks are not performed
simultaneously).
ANNEX B. Estimation results
59.
Results for the main model (Model A) are presented in Error! Reference source not found..
he table shows the US estimates of job automatibility as a function of job tasks and other covariates. Note
that the coefficients in the table are parameter estimates of a non-linear model, so that they cannot be
interpreted as marginal effects. Results for alternative models can be found below.

30

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Table 3.

Determinants of job automatibilty (Model A)

Variable

Coef.

w orkercharacteristics

gender
age group

Std.Err.

p

-0.034

0.012

0.006

20-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-65

0.020
0.161
0.027
0.053
0.100
0.093
0.067
0.077
0.190

0.039
0.038
0.038
0.039
0.038
0.039
0.039
0.041
0.041

0.614
0.000
0.477
0.168
0.009
0.018
0.083
0.061
0.000

medium
high

-0.255
-0.497
-0.002
0.001
-0.001
-0.168

0.035
0.039
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.013

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.030
0.003
0.000

0.103
-0.006
0.135
-0.479
-0.044
-0.075
-0.270
-0.154
0.061
0.010
-0.008
0.806
-2.886
-4.884
2.782
0.482
-1.785
-2.052
-0.965
-4.522
0.237
-0.889
-1.395
-0.709
1.085
-1.492
-4.069
-4.670
0.261
-3.772
-0.808
-0.752
-1.365
-1.036
-4.515
-1.637
1.332

0.016
0.022
0.013
0.017
0.013
0.014
0.014
0.020
0.014
0.013
0.005
0.220
0.265
0.386
0.235
0.255
0.264
0.278
0.245
0.258
0.266
0.233
0.285
0.186
0.182
0.192
0.369
0.340
0.267
1.082
0.203
0.235
0.495
0.265
0.568
0.454
0.084

0.000
0.794
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.475
0.094
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.059
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.373
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.330
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.006
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

tasks

job characteristics

skills

education

literacy
numeracy
problem solving
sector
firm size
11-1000
>1000
responsibility for staff
educational job requirements
required job experience
payment scheme
yearly income (percentiles)
not challanged enough
more training necessary
level of computer use
cooperating with others
exchanging information
training others
presenting
selling
consulting
planning own activities
panning activities of others
organizing own schedule
influencing
negotiating
solving simple problems
solving complex problems
working physically for long
using fingers or hands
reading instructions
reading professional publications
reading books
reading manuals
writing articles
filling forms
calculating shares or percentages
complex math or statistics
internet use for work-related info
using programming language
using communication software
constant

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

31

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
60.
In the main text, the reference model, Model A, is discussed. This model is applied to other
OECD countries to extrapolate the automatibility for these countries. As in some of these countries not all
variables are included in the PIAAC data, we had to re-estimate the automatibility of tasks for the US with
restricted sets of explanatory variables. In total, we estimate 4 models including our reference model
(Model A). In Model B we exclude the Payment Scheme, in Model C we exclude Problem Solving Skills
and in Model D we exclude the Payment Scheme and the Educational Job Requirements. Results for
Models A, B, and C are very similar. This is illustrated in Figure 8, which shows kernel density estimates
of the predicted automation potential. Only for Model D, results differ noticeable. Model D is based on the
selection of variables which are available in the Canadian PIAAC.
Figure 8. Distribution of the Estimated Automatibility (USA)

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

32

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
ANNEX C. Detailed Results by OECD Countries
Figure 9. Distribution of Automatibility by OECD Countries

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

Table 4. Automatibility by OECD Countries
Share of People
Mean
Median
Country
at High Risk
Automatibility
Automatibility
Austria
12%
43%
44%
Belgium
7%
38%
35%
Canada
9%
39%
37%
Czech Republic
10%
44%
48%
Denmark
9%
38%
34%
Estonia
6%
36%
32%
Finland
7%
35%
31%
France
9%
38%
36%
Germany
12%
43%
44%
Ireland
8%
36%
32%
Italy
10%
43%
44%
Japan
7%
37%
35%
Korea
6%
35%
32%
Netherlands
10%
40%
39%
Norway
10%
37%
34%
Poland
7%
40%
40%
Russian Federation
2%
29%
26%
Slovak Republic
11%
44%
48%
Spain
12%
38%
35%
Sweden
7%
36%
33%
United Kingdom
10%
39%
37%
United States
9%
38%
35%
Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

33

DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(2016)15
Table 5.

Share of People with High Automatibility by Education and OECD Countries

Country

ISCED 1

Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Russian Federation
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

100%
59%
68%
33%
52%
41%
82%
0%
40%
67%
51%
25%

56%
30%
49%
100%

Share of People at High Risk by Level of Education
ISCED 2,
ISCED 3A-B,
ISCED 4A-B-C
ISCED 5B
ISCED 5A
ISCED 5A, 6
3C(short)
C(long)
54%
14%
8%
2%
0%
0%
43%
11%
13%
1%
0%
0%
55%
16%
10%
6%
0%
0%
55%
12%
9%
8%
2%
0%
41%
10%
0%
2%
1%
0%
41%
11%
10%
3%
1%
0%
40%
12%
7%
2%
0%
0%
29%
13%
5%
1%
0%
50%
17%
12%
4%
3%
0%
42%
19%
13%
5%
0%
0%
32%
11%
0%
0%
0%
28%
15%
3%
7%
1%
0%
33%
12%
6%
0%
0%
37%
7%
0%
1%
0%
44%
11%
8%
1%
1%
0%
48%
13%
9%
3%
1%
33%
4%
10%
4%
0%
0%
56%
17%
2%
0%
43%
15%
7%
5%
0%
0%
38%
9%
7%
2%
1%
0%
40%
14%
4%
1%
44%
19%
8%
6%
1%
0%

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

Table 6.
Country
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Russian Federation
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

Share of People with High Automatibility by Income and OECD Countries
<10%
38%
17%
21%
22%
35%
14%
16%
0%
33%
27%
9%
26%
21%
33%
33%
10%
0%
20%
25%
25%
32%
19%

Share of People at High Risk by Income Percentile
10%-25%
25%-50%
50%-75%
75%-90%
30%
21%
13%
1%
11%
10%
2%
1%
40%
26%
11%
1%
18%
15%
6%
1%
16%
10%
4%
0%
19%
11%
6%
0%
8%
8%
4%
1%
21%
15%
7%
0%
24%
17%
9%
0%
26%
23%
10%
0%
19%
18%
11%
0%
12%
5%
2%
1%
13%
6%
2%
0%
26%
14%
8%
1%
16%
11%
4%
0%
14%
7%
1%
0%
4%
3%
1%
0%
15%
7%
4%
29%
21%
8%
2%
15%
10%
8%
1%
23%
16%
5%
0%
31%
17%
8%
0%

Source: Authors calculation based on the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)

34

View publication stats

90%-100%
0%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

