388 RE VIE WS

Considering people in systematic conservation
planning: insights from land system science
Takuya Iwamura1*, Yann le Polain de Waroux2, and Michael B Mascia3

Species and ecosystems worldwide continue to decline and disappear in spite of decades of investment in conservation efforts.
Systematic conservation planning (SCP) is a field of study designed to improve conservation programs by identifying land configurations that, if protected, would most efficiently sustain biodiversity. Despite contributing to species persistence in landscapes,
SCP has been criticized for replacing site-based conservation plans that often consider social context. In contrast, land system
science (LSS), an emerging field that explores the process of land-use and land-cover change, integrates social systems and processes into conservation analyses. We suggest that by incorporating insights from LSS on social processes (eg livelihood adaptation
or agricultural intensification), SCP can enhance the legitimacy of conservation plans, thereby reducing the gap between conservation planning and implementation. This represents a necessary first step for SCP to reinvent itself as a decision-support tool that
helps to reconcile the long-standing divide between landscape-level species conservation and social needs.
Front Ecol Environ 2018; 16(7): 388396, doi: 10.1002/fee.1824

D

espite decades of investment in conservation efforts, species and ecosystems continue to decline around the globe
(Butchart et al. 2010). Landscape conservation seeks to counter
this trend by enabling the persistence of species through networks of national parks and other protected areas (Simberloff
1988; Hutton et al. 2005). Although landscape conservation is
indeed integral to conserving biodiversity, the effectiveness of
protected area networks has often been hindered by inappropriate siting, weak implementation, and external threats such as
illegal logging and hunting pressure from surrounding areas (eg

In a nutshell:
 Systematic conservation planning (SCP) is a field of study
that focuses on protecting biodiversity by identifying land
configurations that, if protected, would ensure the survival
of species in a landscape at minimal cost
 Although SCP has helped in conservation efforts, it has
also been criticized for its limited consideration of social
processes, such as changes in peoples livelihood choices
 Land system science (LSS) is an emerging field that explores processes of land-use/land-cover change and that
integrates social systems and dynamics into its analyses
 By drawing on insights from LSS, SCP can more fully
represent social processes in its analyses, potentially reducing the gap between conservation planning and
implementation

1
School of Zoology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel *(takuya@tauex.tau.ac.il); 2Institute for the Study of International
Development and Department of Geography, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada; 3Moore Center for Science, Conservation
International, Arlington, VA

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

DeFries et al. 2010). Planners who seek to identify appropriate
locations for protected areas face various difficulties, such as
heterogeneous species distributions, continuously changing
environments, and limited resources (Pressey et al. 2007). With
increasing globalization leading to intensified demands for agricultural land and other human-dominated systems (Meyfroidt
et al. 2013), the need for thoughtful approaches to conservation
planning and efficient land use is greater than ever.
Systematic conservation planning (SCP; Panel 1 and
WebPanel 1) was developed to improve biodiversity conservation by identifying land that, if protected, would most effectively sustain biodiversity over the long term (Margules and
Pressey 2000; Moilanen et al. 2010). Although SCP encompasses the entire cycle of conservation actions, from planning
to implementation, evaluation, and adaptation (Pressey and
Bottrill 2008), its central focus is to identify optimal land configurations with the highest potential for species conservation
(Sarkar and Margules 2002). In recent years, sophisticated
mathematical algorithms and associated computer software
packages have facilitated the use of SCP approaches around the
world, most notably for zoning in the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park in Australia (Fernandes et al. 2005).
Landscape (or seascape or riverscape) conservation, while
implementing ecologically sound principles based on island
biogeography and landscape ecology, has been criticized for
replacing more site-
based conservation plans that often
emphasize support and participation of local communities,
such as integrated conservation and development projects
(ICDPs) (Hutton et al. 2005; Dressler et al. 2010). The widespread use of SCP in conservation has attracted similar negative assessment for its lack of incorporation of people and
social processes (Ban et al. 2013; Stephanson and Mascia 2014).
Biodiversity conservation has social implications (eg restrictions on agriculture, hunting, fishing, and logging) that often
 The Ecological Society of America

REV IEWS  389

People and conservation planning

accompany conservation actions (Knight et al. 2006); SCP
reduces social impacts by avoiding areas most needed for
human activities (Polasky et al. 2001; Naidoo et al. 2006) based
on factors such as agricultural opportunity cost (Naidoo and
Iwamura 2007), an approach that reflects the land sparing
paradigm (Phalan et al. 2011). However, incorporating social
processes into SCP requires a much wider and deeper understanding of human behavior (Figure 1). Human activities are
dynamic and nested within a social context, and are shaped by
political, economic, and social institutions. In its current forms,
SCP is not equipped to realistically incorporate these social
factors, despite their importance for successful conservation.
By contrast, analyses based on land system science (LSS), an
emerging field that explores the processes of land-use/land-
cover change (hereafter land change), effectively integrate
social context, dynamic socialecological processes, and human
agency (ie the ability of people to make autonomous decisions
within a certain context) (WebTable 1; Berkes and Folke 1998;
Ostrom 2007; Turner et al. 2007). LSS integrates data about land
systems (eg satellite images, agricultural production, population,
and other social data) with theories on socioecological dynamics
(DeFries et al. 2004) to examine both the immediate and underlying causes of land change (Lambin et al. 2001; Meyfroidt et al.
2013). As such, LSS can be used to inform SCP by providing
social datasets (Stephanson and Mascia 2014), and therefore has
the potential to catalyze conceptual advances in SCP.
To clarify possible pathways for including people and social
processes in SCP, we articulate key insights from LSS. To orient
the reader, we first provide brief histories of SCP and LSS, then
highlight the key challenges facing SCP, and discuss ways in
which LSS can be used to address them.

The fields of SCP and LSS
Systematic conservation planning
Conservation biology, which first emerged as a crisis discipline
in the 1980s in response to concerns over the loss of biodiversity, emphasizes the importance of incorporating a broad
knowledge basis, including information derived from the social
sciences (Soul 1985; Meine et al. 2006). However, efforts to
integrate people and social processes into conservation plans
and interventions have been elusive (Adams et al. 2004). In
1982, the principle of including people and social needs in
habitat-based conservation was recognized at the Third World
Parks Congress in Bali. Various donor organizations established
projects focusing on local capacity and participatory schemes,
such as ICDPs or community-based natural resource management (Dressler et al. 2010). But by the late 1990s, substantial
amounts of funding were being shifted instead toward landscape
conservation (Hutton et al. 2010), which advocates for creating
networks of multiple protected areas to achieve species persistence in landscapes, and is based on ecological principles
drawn from island biogeography and landscape ecology (Wilcox
and Murphy 1985; Simberloff 1988).
 The Ecological Society of America

Panel 1. Typical SCP steps

SCP software users are usually required to provide model parameters
in order to apply SCP to the region of interest, a process that can be
summarized in nine steps: (1) determining the extent of the planning
area, (2) determining the planning units, (3) determining the budget,
(4) listing species within each planning unit, (5) representing the land
use at each planning unit, (6) representing the cost of conservation
actions, (7) determining the targets and benefits of each conservation action, (8) determining patterns of spatial configuration, and (9)
obtaining and communicating outputs (WebTable 2; WebPanel 1).
Among these, although land use itself is not required as a parameter, most SCP software requires input regarding whether an area is
already protected or is unavailable for protection.

Against this background, SCP emerged as a means of developing methods and decision-support tools to identify the most
cost-effective configurations of land for protecting other species from human threats (Margules and Pressey 2000). Like
landscape conservation, SCP builds on insights from island
biogeography and landscape ecology (eg single large or several
small, SLOSS; Simberloff 1988), and has provided computing
tools for landscape conservation (Hutton et al. 2010). One key
SCP principle is that of complementarity, or the degree to
which locations contain different sets of species and thereby
complement one another in a network of conservation areas
(Margules and Pressey 2000; Sarkar and Margules 2002). SCP
approaches consider every piece of land as a potential candidate for a new protected area within a network of sites; an area
with fewer species than others may nevertheless add some or
all of the missing species at a relatively low cost and therefore
represents a wise conservation investment.
Finding cost-
effective land configurations that consider
complementarity among all sites is extremely computationally
intensive because of the huge number of possible combinations of selected areas (2n, where n = the number of candidate
areas). Without using approaches derived from operational
research and artificial intelligence, calculating the conservation
value of every possible combination of land would be prohibitively time consuming (Sarkar and Margules 2002), given that
the number of possible land configurations for protected areas
increases exponentially with the number of areas that are candidates for protection. Beginning in the mid-1990s, computational algorithms were embedded within software packages,
which automated the process of land configuration to select
protected areas that maximize biodiversity protection while
minimizing costs (Polasky et al. 2001). Today, SCP software
continues to incorporate new insights, such as connectivity
between protected areas (Moilanen et al. 2010) or multiple
land uses, including recreational uses (Watts et al. 2009).
Although its true impacts on conservation goals have yet to be
measured (McIntosh et al. 2017), SCP has been applied in a
variety of environments, from terrestrial (Cowling et al. 2003)
to marine (Smith et al. 2009) to freshwater (Linke et al. 2011).
Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

390 RE VIE WS

T Iwamura et al.

(b)

(c)

(d)

 J Scranton/Conservation International

(a)

Figure 1. (a) Agricultural expansion, here around Ro Negro National Park (Paraguay), makes it necessary to account for dynamic anthropogenic threats
when designating protected areas. (b) The Rupununi savanna (shown here in Guyana) is developed on the Brazilian side of the Rupununi River, highlighting
the importance of accounting for land governance. (c) The designation of protected areas in highly populated regions, such as Indonesias Gunung Gede
Pangrango National Park, can impact the livelihoods of multiple communities. (d) Indigenous hunting practices, such as controlled fires (shown here in
Guyana), can be restricted by protected areas, incentivizing hunters to shift to other areas and thereby shifting impacts on biodiversity.

Despite its widespread contribution to conservation planning and practice, much criticism has been leveled against SCP,
and conservation planning in general (Knight et al. 2006; Ban
et al. 2013; Stephanson and Mascia 2014). First, SCP tends
toward a static view of landscapes, which may not accurately
reflect the dynamics of the real world, given that both ecological systems (eg species distribution; Pressey et al. 2007) and
land cover (Geist and Lambin 2002) change over time. In addition, SCP applies a rather inflexible view toward anthropogenic
threats (eg deforestation trends) even though it is well known
that future human actions cannot be directly predicted from
historical trends (Chowdhury and Moran 2012). Second, SCP
analyses have been faulted for focusing on natural ecological
processes (Ban et al. 2013; Stephanson and Mascia 2014) while
ignoring the role of human activity in shaping the global
atmosphere, ecology, and even geology (Waters et al. 2016).
SCP software rarely incorporates social data (eg land titles,
willingness to participate) or processes that might affect
human behavior (eg distribution of conservation income and
burden). Finally, conservation planning often fails to view
humans as agents of change, despite clear evidence that individual human choices collectively affect social and ecological
Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

systems; for example, planners rarely take into account the fact
that individuals shift their resource-use patterns following the
establishment of protected areas (Ewers and Rodrigues 2008).
These shortcomings limit the ability of SCP to inform conservation planning and practice because it leads to conservation
plans that do not reflect dynamic social processes.

Land system science
LSS emerged in the 1990s in response to growing recognition of the role of land change as a major component of
global change, motivating researchers from the natural, social,
and geographic sciences to unite around its study (Gutman
et al. 2004; Turner et al. 2007). LSS considers land as an
integrated socialecological system (Berkes and Folke 1998;
Haberl et al. 2004; Ostrom 2007) and relies on both social
and environmental data to improve our understanding of
the processes of land change. LSS is primarily concerned
with observing and monitoring land change; understanding
its causes, location, timing, and magnitude; modeling it;
and assessing its outcomes in terms of environmental and
social sustainability (Turner et al. 2007).
 The Ecological Society of America

REV IEWS  391

People and conservation planning

Although advances in Earth observatory technologies (eg
remote sensing) provide LSS with the ability to monitor land
changes over wide spatial and temporal ranges, the integration of social-science theories enables the investigation of the
role of social processes in causing such changes (Meyfroidt
2015). For example, following classical economic theory, land
is used for the activity that generates the highest profit; this
activity itself is a function of both the biophysical properties
of the land, and the distance to markets (Walker 2004). The
New Economic Geography literature suggests that positive
feedbacks favor the formation of land-use clusters (eg for
soybean production in Brazil; Garrett et al. 2013). Institutions
(eg land tenure, access, and governance) are also major determinants of land use, as has been demonstrated in studies of
the effects of property rights on deforestation (Nolte et al.
2013) or of market-driven governance institutions (Heilmayr
and Lambin 2016). Finally, land use can be a function of population density and local households livelihood strategies, as
reflected in the induced intensification hypothesis (Turner
and Ali 1996) and by livelihood studies (eg Zimmerer 2007),
respectively.
Land-use models typically represent the process of land
change as a state transition for a spatial unit (eg a grid pixel).
The location, timing, and magnitude of change are predicted
based on spatial attributes (often proxies of profits from alternative land uses, but also representations of other structural
drivers such as land tenure) and the attributes of decision
makers, captured at various levels (eg administrative units,
communities, individuals, and households). Some dynamic
land-use models, such as the Conversion of Land Use and its
Effects (CLUE) model (Verburg and Overmars 2009), combine aggregate modeling of land demand with spatial allocation algorithms to predict changes in land use. Others, such as
agent-based models, allow for a more complex representation
of human agency and decision making by specifying decision
rules at the level of individual agents (Parker et al. 2003).
LSS researchers are increasingly seeking to improve understanding of the determinants of land change by transcending a
purely place-based perspective and incorporating concepts
like global value chains (linkages between stages and actors of
production occurring in multiple locations; Rueda and Lambin
2013), telecoupling (interactions over distances; Liu et al. 2013;
Gasparri et al. 2016), indirect land-use change (Searchinger
et al. 2008; Meyfroidt et al. 2013), and flow-centered land governance (Sikor et al. 2013). Similarly, the increasing role of private actors, such as global agricultural corporations, is shifting
the research agenda toward the study of private governance
mechanisms (Lambin et al. 2014) and of commodity or neoliberal frontiers, where expansion of large-scale commodity
farms leads to the appropriation and conversion of natural
habitats (Brannstrom 2009; le Polain de Waroux et al. 2017).
Integrating different models to improve model dynamics is
another challenge currently being addressed, in particular the
integration of land-use models with more complex ecosystem
and macro-economic models, such as computable global equi The Ecological Society of America

librium models (Brown et al. 2013). Calls have also been made
to transcend a neoclassical economic framing and to more
fully integrate insights from economic geography into LSS
(Munroe et al. 2014).

Emerging insights
Side-
by-
side comparison between SCP and LSS provides
insights into the potential to incorporate social processes
into SCP (WebTable 1). These insights can be categorized
into three main themes: dynamic landscape, social context,
and human agency.

Dynamic landscape
SCP operates on the assumption of a static human pressure
on landscapes, assuming, for example, a constant human
population in a given region, static demand for land-related
products (eg crops), and fixed market prices. These assumptions are, in turn, reflected in static conservation costs (eg
opportunity cost layer) and anthropogenic threats (eg constant deforestation rate). However, we know that costs and
threats vary over time in response to human activity. LSS
recognizes that social, economic, and demographic changes
make landscapes fundamentally dynamic, and can therefore
use information on these human drivers of land use (eg
DeFries et al. 2004; Verburg and Overmars 2009) to provide
estimates of future conditions, such as future land cover
and conservation costs. Although dynamic ecological models
for conservation have existed for a long time (eg Fahrig
and Merriam 1994), they generally fail to consider human
actions as part of the system; LSS represents a way of integrating the human factor into landscape dynamics.
One way by which to incorporate a dynamic approach
through LSS was proposed by Faleiro et al. (2013), who used
the probability of future land conversion in the Cerrado
savanna ecoregion of Brazil to select priority areas for conservation and to protect ~154 species of non-flying mammals that
inhabit the savanna. Future land cover in 2015 was calculated
from a transition matrix for land-cover change based on a
dataset from 20022008, using the Land Change Modeler
module of ArcGIS (https://clarklabs.org/land-change-modeler-for-arcgis) to estimate the future rates of land-cover change
based on various variables. The authors used parameters such
as elevation and precipitation, as well as proximity to roads,
recent deforestation sites, and cities, to predict the likelihood of
land change. These were combined with future predictions of
species distributions to explore alternatives for better conservation planning in the Cerrado.
The approach illustrated above does not incorporate feedback
between conservation actions and land changes resulting from
these actions, which is crucial for the implementation of adaptive
management (Lee 2001). To achieve such feedback loops between
conservation actions and land changes, one can assume iterative
conservation investments over multiple (eg annual) cycles, where
Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

392 RE VIE WS

T Iwamura et al.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

the impacts on cropland abandonment after the collapse of
communism in Eastern European countries were explored
using a wide range of social variables  related to land ownership and management, demography, and infrastructure  in the
Carpathian Mountains of Romania (Mller et al. 2009). In this
way, LSS can inform SCP studies as to which aspects of social
context are related to specific types of land change (eg deforestation), and illustrate how to elicit systematic information about
specific social processes (eg through household surveys and
use of census data). LSS has adopted and developed conceptual
frameworks (eg immediate and underlying drivers of land
change) and quantitative models (eg spatial regressions) for
the application of such information.

Human agency
Figure 2. Integrating land-use feedbacks into SCP with gradual conservation investment. Based on (a) an original landscape, (b) a protected area is
proposed through SCP. After its designation, the landscape continues to
change, altering conservation values; (c) for example, abandonment of
cropland and rangeland following protected area establishment may
increase the conservation value for these lands. The protected area network is updated based on (d) changing conservation values, contributing
to (e) further landscape change, including the conversion (and therefore
the loss of conservation value) of unprotected lands. Through multiple
iterations, it is possible to compare different pathways of protected area
deployment.

an SCP module will select sites at each cycle based on the landscape predictions of an LSS module in the previous cycle
(Figure 2). Such feedback is triggered by the response of land
users to conservation policies, for which the other two insights 
social context and human agency  are relevant.

Social context
Although the interactions between people and nature are
fundamental to biodiversity conservation, SCP maintains an
ecology-centric approach to conservation planning, and the
incorporation of social data into SCP-based analyses has generally been limited (Knight et al. 2006; Stephanson and Mascia
2014). However, recent research highlights the importance
of social context for conservation planning (Ban et al. 2013;
Stephanson and Mascia 2014). To address this shortcoming,
Stephanson and Mascia (2014) introduced the Putting People
on the Map (P-
MAP) approach, a hierarchical framework
used to incorporate social datasets into conservation planning.
P-MAP applies social attributes categorized into five domains
(economic well-being, health, political empowerment, education, and culture) in order to (1) define conservation targets,
(2) design conservation strategies, (3) explore socioecological
relationships, and (4) practice adaptive management.
LSS offers both theories and datasets necessary to examine
social factors affecting land change, encompassing such aspects
of social context as land tenure and governance, demography,
markets and prices, and livelihoods (Figure 3). For instance,
Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

SCP often treats people as passive entities that are merely
impacted by conservation interventions (eg establishment
of protected areas) and do not actively change their behaviors in response to these interventions (eg by increasing
the intensity of resource extraction). In reality, however,
humans are autonomous agents who adapt to the new circumstances created by changes in policy environments, and
actively shape these situations and policy environments
themselves. Recently, LSS studies have started to model
individual stakeholders behavioral responses to changes in
local conditions, including policy changes. For example, using
agent-
based modeling, Iwamura et al. (2016) developed a
spatially explicit simulation model of the interactions between
indigenous peoples livelihood activities (hunting and agriculture) and wildlife populations in the Amazon. In this
model, animal populations are affected by hunting, but are
regulated through animal metapopulation dynamics, which
interact with vegetation succession mechanisms to define
habitat patches for each species (Figure 4). This simulation
setting allowed the authors to explore interactions between
changes in hunting pressure due to human population
increase, which itself was affected by food aid policies, and
changes in animal populations and vegetation cover.
The outcome of conservation actions based on SCP can be
examined using similar spatially explicit models incorporating
human agency (Figure 4). One can test the effectiveness of conservation interventions with or without the inclusion of compensation programs for the loss of livelihood options (eg hunting or agricultural opportunities). Tools to address human
agency also enable SCP to incorporate the unintended displacement of resource extraction, such as deforestation or hunting
pressure, from within a newly designated protected area to
neighboring lands. An LSS model (eg agent-based model) can be
used to estimate changes in land cover based on the behavioral
responses of autonomous human agents, which in turn affect the
status of species habitats in the landscape. The adjusted conservation benefits (eg the number of species protected) can then be
used in the SCP process, modifying the selection of conservation
investment in order to maximize the outcome.
 The Ecological Society of America

People and conservation planning

REV IEWS  393

Discussion
Implications for conservation science
The mission of SCP  ensuring species persistence in landscapes through ecologically
interconnected networks of multiple protected
areas  has been formulated on the basis of
biological insights derived from landscape
ecology and island biogeography (eg non-
homogenous distribution of species, complementarities, connectivity) (Margules and
Pressey 2000). At the same time, SCP focuses
on resource optimization from decision-
making sciences (eg operational research) for
the efficient use of available resources (Sarkar
and Margules 2002). SCP treats human activ- Figure 3. Contributions of LSS to characterizing social context for SCP. The SCP module develities in the target area as a cost to con- ops a protected area network based on conservation values (eg biodiversity), taking into
servation efforts, which may hinder its account elements of social context such as human population, land ownership, or infrastrucobjectives (ie species persistence), and con- ture. After completion of the SCP process for resource allocation, the impacts from proposed
sequently focuses on minimizing such costs, land configurations are assessed based on both biological and social variables. Social context
often represented by surrogate data (Naidoo provides a set of parameters to evaluate the social impacts of SCP configurations. LSS can
and Iwamura 2007) by choosing the areas provide both data and theories relating to social context for SCP.
with fewer human activities for protection.
In this context, social complexity is often considered to be
tive land management or top-down, centralized decision makexogenous to the SCP framework and, as such, is treated
ing) on the long-term effectiveness of protected area networks.
as uncertainty with regard to political capacity or land availTheoretical advances in LSS, such as telecoupling, can also be
ability (McDonald-Madden et al. 2008). This simplification
directly applied to SCP to examine the impacts of remote drivcreates gaps in the planning and implementation of SCP
ers (eg increased demands for consumer products) on deforest(Knight et al. 2006) and overlooks the importance of social
ation (Liu et al. 2013; Gasparri et al. 2016). SCP evaluation
processes (Ban et al. 2013). Incorporation of insights from
frameworks can support assessments of social impacts of land
LSS  summarized here as dynamic landscapes, social conconfigurations (eg McIntosh et al. 2017).
text, and human agency  into SCP approaches may assist
The conservation literature often emphasizes the role of
in the development of more effective pathways for achieving
local stakeholders, including their reactions to conservation
SCP goals.
policies, in achieving successful conservation. LSS has
We have discussed dynamic landscapes as incorporating
addressed the issue of human agency by studying the implicaanthropogenic drivers of land change (eg human population
tions of stakeholder preferences and decision making for land
increase) into SCP (Figure 2). Although the dynamic nature of
changes (Figure 4). Of particular interest in the case of SCP is
ecological systems has been a main focus of landscape conserthe possibility of leakage  the displacement of an environvation (eg through the study of vegetation succession and gene
mental impact due to a policy intervention, including proflows), the implications of dynamic social systems in conservatected areas, which can displace deforestation or hunting to
tion sciences have received scant attention. By learning from LSS,
surrounding areas (Ewers and Rodrigues 2008)  resulting
SCP can incorporate underlying factors of land changes into a
from behavioral responses to new conservation interventions
spatial optimization scheme of conservation planning for maxi(le Polain de Waroux et al. 2017). LSS has developed ways of
mizing the chances of species persistence. Furthermore, such
representing human decision making in formal models that
incorporation into SCP models may serve to simulate the impacts
could fulfill the need for a better representation of human
of social and ecological changes on conservation targets or on the
agency in SCP, and help address issues such as leakage
effectiveness of conservation planning.
(Figure 5). SCP, with LSS, may therefore be able to develop the
Incorporating social context into conservation science has
framework needed to incorporate stakeholders behavior into
been discussed extensively in the literature (Ban et al. 2013;
the computation of land configurations.
Stephanson and Mascia 2014). LSS has developed theoretical
and methodological approaches for studying the impacts of
Implications for conservation practice
social context on land changes (Geist and Lambin 2002; Turner
et al. 2007). By incorporating these, SCP may, for instance, be
Because of its focus on long-term species persistence through
able to simulate the influence of governance type (eg cooperanetworks of multiple protected areas, landscape conservation
 The Ecological Society of America

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

394 RE VIE WS

T Iwamura et al.

lead to ineffective conservation policies, SCP
software does not consider such implications
when selecting optimal sites for protection.
However, long-term conservation success may
depend on equal conservation investment
across various types of land ownership. In this
case, implementation of conservation plans will
be easier if SCP incorporates information on
land tenure during the selection process (Step 8
in WebTable 2 and WebPanel 1) in order to distribute resources among different land owners.
LSS provides not only the relevant social
parameters but also the concepts that are
required for SCP to address the social context.
By incorporating insights from LSS, SCP can
assist in the selection of sites that better reflect
the social reality within which conservation is
taking place, thereby potentially improving the
efficacy of the selection process.
Finally, major changes in conservation outFigure 4. Representation of human agency in SCP using agent-based modeling of an indigecomes
may result when stakeholders, either
nous community. Each household is represented as an agent achieving subsistence through
individual
land users or large-scale enterprises,
hunting and/or agriculture. The selection of a protected area restricts certain practices (here,
hunting and agriculture), causing human agents to modify their subsistence strategies, with decide to change their behaviors. For example,
consequences for fauna (through changes in hunting practices, such as illegal hunting or over- farmers may change crop types in response to
hunting) and land cover (through changes in agricultural practices, such as intensification). The changes in commodity prices or the prospect of
explicit representation of these socialecological interactions can be incorporated to update future productivity under a changing climate.
the selection of protected areas through SCP processes.
Such decisions may alter their behavior in ways
that run against a certain conservation policy
(eg expansion of agricultural lands, more intensive crop produchas shifted conservation resources away from site-based local
tion, increased pesticide use). LSS has already developed novel
habitat protection (eg ICDPs). Historically, SCP has helped
methodological and theoretical frameworks to understand what
advance landscape conservation projects by providing effecmotivates or facilitates land changes (eg agent-based modeling;
tive tools for designing optimal protected area networks.
Parker et al. 2003). We believe that the recognition and study of
However, this also means that SCP has largely overlooked
human agency and decision making can provide effective avelocal human communities, their social contexts and dynamics,
nues for improving SCP processes under realistic scenarios,
and their responses to conservation policies (Ban et al. 2013;
including predicting stakeholder responses to conservation polStephanson and Mascia 2014). We argue that the integration
icies.
of insights from LSS, in addition to improving computed
conservation plans, can help SCP to minimize the gap
between these plans and their implementation.
Conclusions
SCP practitioners often struggle to incorporate changing
baselines for their conservation plans, such as increasing popuAlthough the importance of incorporating people and social
lations or agricultural expansion that may cause future habitat
processes into biodiversity conservation has been long recloss. Understanding such shifting social baselines is crucial for
ognized, integration of these factors into conservation efforts
achieving adaptive management (Lee 2001) within the SCP
has not always been implemented. Landscape conservation,
framework. Since conservation plans (or any policy changes)
while promoting long-term species persistence, shifts investtake time to implement, the ability to track the evolution of
ment resources away from local projects that focus on people
underlying drivers of future landscape change is extremely
and social processes. SCP has advanced landscape conservaluable. Using LSS methods to estimate future land changes
vation by providing a cost-effective method for identifying
due to shifting social baselines, conservation practitioners may
optimal land configurations but it has largely neglected social
conduct more timely conservation decisions.
processes. By integrating insights from LSS, SCP has the
Selection of conservation areas is the product of a negotiapotential to provide a framework that explicitly incorporates
tion involving different groups of stakeholders operating in a
people and social processes at the landscape level. These
specific social and political environment (Knight et al. 2006).
efforts represent a first step for SCP to reinvent itself as a
Although failure to take underlying social contexts (eg types of
tool that helps to reconcile landscape-level species persistence
governance, land ownerships, demography) into account can
with social needs.
Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

 The Ecological Society of America

REV IEWS  395

People and conservation planning

Acknowledgements

(a)

(b)

(e)

(d)

(c)

We thank M Persson at Chalmers University
for valuable discussions. The research reported
in this paper contributes to the Global Land
Programme (GLP.earth).

References
Adams WM, Aveling R, Brockington D, et al. 2004.
Biodiversity conservation and the eradication of
poverty. Science 306: 1146.
Ban NC, Mills M, Tam J, et al. 2013. A socialecological approach to conservation planning: embedding social considerations. Front Ecol Environ
11: 194202.
Berkes F and Folke C (Eds). 1998. Linking social and
ecological systems: management practices and
social mechanisms for building resilience.

Figure 5. Incorporation of land-use leakage in SCP. The designation of (a) a protected area
restricts land uses, some of which (b) may be leaked to other areas. (c) The amount of leaked
land use is estimated based on empirical evidence, scenarios, or simulations (eg agent-based
modeling). (d) A land-use change model reallocates these quantities. Based on the updated
land-cover map, (e) gain and loss of species within and outside the protected area are
calculated, and used to assess conservation impacts. Steps (ae) can be repeated with different siting choices to compare alternative protected area designations.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Brannstrom C. 2009. South Americas neoliberal
agricultural frontiers: places of environmental
sacrifice or conservation opportunity. AMBIO
38: 14149.
Brown DG, Verburg PH, Pontius Jr RG, and Lange
MD. 2013. Opportunities to improve impact, integration, and evaluation of land change models. Curr Opin Env Sust 5: 45257.
Butchart SHM, Walpole M, Collen B, et al. 2010. Global biodiversity:
indicators of recent declines. Science 328: 116468.
Chowdhury RR and Moran EF. 2012. Turning the curve: a critical
review of Kuznets approaches. Appl Geogr 32: 311.
Cowling RM, Pressey RL, Rouget M, and Lombard AT. 2003. A conservation plan for a global biodiversity hotspot  the Cape
Floristic Region, South Africa. Biol Conserv 112: 191216.
DeFries RS, Foley JA, and Asner GP. 2004. Land use choices: balancing
human needs and ecosystem function. Front Ecol Environ 2: 24957.
DeFries RS, Karanth KK, and Pareeth S. 2010. Interactions between
protected areas and their surroundings in human-
dominated
tropical landscapes. Biol Conserv 143: 287080.
Dressler W, Bscher B, Schoon M, et al. 2010. From hope to crisis and
back again? A critical history of the global CBNRM narrative.
Environ Conserv 37: 515.
Ewers RM and Rodrigues ASL. 2008. Estimates of reserve effectiveness are confounded by leakage. Trends Ecol Evol 23: 11316.
Fahrig L and Merriam G. 1994. Conservation of fragmented populations. Conserv Biol 8: 5059.
Faleiro FV, Machado RB, and Loyola RD. 2013. Defining spatial conservation priorities in the face of land use and climate change. Biol
Conserv 158: 24857.
Fernandes L, Day J, Lewis A, et al. 2005. Establishing representative
no-take areas in the Great Barrier Reef: large-scale implementation of theory on marine protected areas. Conserv Biol 19: 1733
44.
Garrett RD, Lambin EF, and Naylor RL. 2013. The new economic
geography of land use change: supply chain configurations and
land use in the Brazilian Amazon. Land Use Policy 34: 26575.
 The Ecological Society of America

Gasparri NI, Kuemmerle T, Meyfroidt P, et al. 2016. The emerging soybean production frontier in southern Africa: conservation challenges
and the role of southsouth telecouplings. Conserv Lett 9: 2131.
Geist HJ and Lambin EF. 2002. Proximate causes and underlying driving forces of tropical deforestation: tropical forests are disappearing as the result of many pressures, both local and regional, acting
in various combinations in different geographical locations.
BioScience 52: 14350.
Gutman G, Janetos AC, Justice CO, et al. 2004. Land change science:
observing, monitoring, and understanding trajectories of change on
the Earths surface. Berlin, Germany: Springer.

Haberl H, Fischer-Kowalski M, Krausmann F, et al. 2004. Progress
towards sustainability? What the conceptual framework of material and energy flow accounting (MEFA) can offer. Land Use
Policy 21: 199213.
Heilmayr R and Lambin EF. 2016. Impacts of nonstate, market-driven
governance on Chilean forests. P Natl Acad Sci USA 113: 291015.
Hutton J, Adams WM, and Murombedzi JC. 2005. Back to the barriers? Changing narratives in biodiversity conservation. Forum Dev
Stud 32: 34170.
Iwamura T, Lambin EF, Silvius KM, et al. 2016. Socioenvironmental
sustainability of indigenous lands: simulating coupled human
natural systems in the Amazon. Front Ecol Environ 14: 7783.
Knight AT, Cowling RM, and Campbell BM. 2006. An operational model
for implementing conservation action. Conserv Biol 20: 40819.
Lambin EF, Meyfroidt P, and Rueda X. 2014. Effectiveness and synergies of policy instruments for land use governance in tropical
regions. Global Environ Chang 28: 12940.
Lambin EF, Turner BL, Geist HJ, et al. 2001. The causes of land use
and land cover change: moving beyond the myths. Global Environ
Chang 11: 26169.
Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

396 RE VIE WS
Lee KN. 2001. Appraising adaptive management. In: Buck LE, Geisler
CC, Schelhas J, and Wollenberg E (Eds). Biological diversity: balancing interests through adaptive collaborative management. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
le Polain de Waroux Y, Garrett RD, Graesser J, et al. 2017. The restructuring of South American soy and beef production and trade
under changing environmental regulations. World Dev; doi.
org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.05.034.
Linke S, Turak E, and Nel J. 2011. Freshwater conservation planning:
the case for systematic approaches. Freshwater Biol 56: 620.
Liu J, Hull V, Batistella M, et al. 2013. Framing sustainability in a telecoupled world. Ecol Soc 18: art26.
Margules CR and Pressey RL. 2000. Systematic conservation planning. Nature 405: 24353.
McIntosh EJ, Pressey RL, Lloyd S, et al. 2017. The impact of systematic
conservation planning. Annu Rev Env Resour 42: 5.15.21.
McDonald-Madden E, Bode M, Game ET, et al. 2008. The need for
speed: informed land acquisitions for conservation in a dynamic
property market. Ecol Lett 11: 116977.
Meine C, Soule M, and Noss RF. 2006. A mission-driven discipline:
the growth of conservation biology. Conserv Biol 20: 63151.
Meyfroidt P. 2015. Approaches and terminology for causal analysis in
land systems science. J Land Use Sci 11: 50122.
Meyfroidt P, Lambin EF, Erb K-H, and Hertel TW. 2013. Globalization
of land use: distant drivers of land change and geographic displacement of land use. Curr Opin Env Sust 5: 43844.
Moilanen A, Wilson KA, and Possingham H (Eds). 2010. Spatial conservation prioritization: quantitative methods and computational
tools. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Mller D, Kuemmerle T, Rusu M, and Griffiths P. 2009. Lost in transition: determinants of post-
socialist cropland abandonment in
Romania. J Land Use Sci 4: 10929.
Munroe DK, McSweeney K, Olson JL, and Mansfield B. 2014. Using
economic geography to reinvigorate land-
change science.
Geoforum 52: 1221.
Naidoo R, Balmford A, Ferraro PJ, et al. 2006. Integrating economic
costs into conservation planning. Trends Ecol Evol 21: 68187.
Naidoo R and Iwamura T. 2007. Global-scale mapping of economic
benefits from agricultural lands: implications for conservation
priorities. Biol Conserv 140: 4049.
Nolte C, Agrawal A, Silvius KM, and Soares-Filho BS. 2013.
Governance regime and location influence avoided deforestation
success of protected areas in the Brazilian Amazon. P Natl Acad
Sci USA 110: 495661.
Ostrom E. 2007. A diagnostic approach for going beyond panaceas. P
Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 1518187.
Parker DC, Manson SM, Janssen MA, et al. 2003. Multi-agent systems
for the simulation of land use and land cover change: a review.
Ann Assoc Am Geogr 93: 31437.
Phalan B, Balmford A, Green RE, and Scharlemann JPW. 2011.
Minimising the harm to biodiversity of producing more food
globally. Food Policy 36: S6271.
Polasky S, Camm JD, and Garber-Yonts B. 2001. Selecting biological
reserves cost-effectively: an application to terrestrial vertebrate
conservation in Oregon. Land Econ 77: 6878.

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.1824

T Iwamura et al.

Pressey RL and Bottrill MC. 2008. Opportunism, threats, and the evolution of systematic conservation planning. Conserv Biol 22:
134045.
Pressey RL, Cabeza M, Watts ME, et al. 2007. Conservation planning
in a changing world. Trends Ecol Evol 22: 58392.
Rueda X and Lambin EF. 2013. Linking globalization to local land
uses: how eco-
consumers and gourmands are changing the
Colombian coffee landscapes. World Dev 41: 286301.
Sarkar S and Margules C. 2002. Operationalizing biodiversity for conservation planning. J Biosci 27: 299308.
Searchinger T, Heimlich R, Houghton RA, et al. 2008. Use of US croplands for biofuels increases greenhouse gases through emissions
from land use change. Science 319: 123840.
Sikor T, Auld G, Bebbington AJ, et al. 2013. Global land governance:
from territory to flow? Curr Opin Env Sust 5: 52227.
Simberloff D. 1988. The contribution of population and community
biology to conservation science. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 19: 473511.
Smith RJ, Eastwood PD, Ota Y, and Rogers SI. 2009. Developing best
practice for using Marxan to locate marine protected areas in
European waters. ICES J Mar Sci 66: 18894.
Soul ME. 1985. What is conservation biology? BioScience 35: 72734.
Stephanson SL and Mascia MB. 2014. Putting people on the map
through an approach that integrates social data in conservation
planning. Conserv Biol 28: 123648.
Turner BL and Ali AMS. 1996. Induced intensification: agricultural
change in Bangladesh with implications for Malthus and Boserup.
P Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 1498491.
Turner BL, Lambin EF, and Reenberg A. 2007. The emergence of land
change science for global environmental change and sustainability.
P Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 2066671.
Verburg PH and Overmars KP. 2009. Combining top-down and bottom-up dynamics in land use modeling: exploring the future of
abandoned farmlands in Europe with the Dyna-CLUE model.
Landscape Ecol 24: 116781.
Walker R. 2004. Theorizing land cover and land use change: the case
of tropical deforestation. Int Regional Sci Rev 27: 24770.
Waters CN, Zalasiewicz J, Summerhayes C, et al. 2016. The
Anthropocene is functionally and stratigraphically distinct from
the Holocene. Science 351: aad2622.
Watts ME, Ball IR, Stewart RS, et al. 2009. Marxan with Zones: software for optimal conservation based land-and sea-use zoning.
Environ Modell Softw 24: 151321.
Wilcox BAF and Murphy DD. 1985. Conservation strategy: the effects
of fragmentation on extinction. Am Nat 125: 87987.
Zimmerer KS. 2007. Agriculture, livelihoods, and globalization: the
analysis of new trajectories (and avoidance of just-so stories) of
humanenvironment change and conservation. Agr Hum Values
24: 916.

Supporting Information
Additional, web-only material may be found in the online
version of this article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/fee.1824/suppinfo

 The Ecological Society of America

