Intelligent Transportation Systems

Artificial Societies for
Integrated and Sustainable
Development of Metropolitan
Systems

Editor: Fei-Yue Wang
University of Arizona and
Chinese Academy of Science
feiyue@sie.arizona.edu

Fei-Yue Wang, Chinese Academy of Sciences and the University of Arizona
Shuming Tang, Shandong Academy of Sciences, China

O

ver the past 15 years, Chinas urbanization has almost
doubled, with approximately 31 percent of the popu-

lation now living in one of the countrys 660 cities or 19,000
towns. This rapid increase in metropolitan population and
other urbanization activities has imposed a huge demand
on Chinese metropolitan transportation systems, most of
which werent prepared for such development. For example, in 2003, the number of passenger vehicles increased
by 85 percent, compared to an average of 1.5 percent in
the rest of the world.1 Additionally, 667,507 traffic accidents were reported, causing 104,372 deaths and 494,174
injuries and making traffic accidents the number-two
cause of accidental deaths of children in China.1
Pollution is another transportation-related problem in
China, contributing to over 90 percent of the total noise
intensity and 60 percent carbon monoxide emissions, 50
percent nitrogen oxide emissions, and 30 percent hydrocarbon emissions in the metropolitan areas.1 According to
the UNDP Chinas National Human Development Report,

Editors Perspective
This issues article is based on a discussion at the IEEE/CAS Workshop on Artificial Transportation Systems, held 2526 April 2004 in
Shanghai and on objectives of the Technical Committee on Artificial
Transportation Systems (ATS), recently established by the IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Council. The ATS Technical Committee will develop standard techniques beyond computer simulations
to analyze, evaluate, control, and manage transportation systems.
The goal is to use concepts and methods in artificial and complex
systems in ITS, and clearly artificial intelligence, life, and societies
will play a key role in this new direction of ITS research.
Feel free to contact me if you have any comments about this
department. I also seek contributions on the status of ITS projects
worldwide and on innovative ideas and trends in future transportation systems. Contact me at feiyue@sie.arizona.edu.
Fei-Yue Wang

82

in 2001 China had 16 of the worlds top 20 most airpolluted cities.2 Additionally, China has been reducing
its land resource (developed lands) at a rate of 2 to 3
percent owing to transportation-infrastructure construction, further intensifying the pollution problem.1
Finally, weak and unreliable urban transportation systems
have significantly increased the cost of logistic activities in
China, currently at a level of 20 percent GDP. This is much
higher than the average (10 percent) in developed countries.1
Although China has made significant efforts over the past
two decades to solve its transportation problems, traffic
congestion, pollution, accidents, and other related problems
are only getting worse. So, a team of over 70 researchers
from 10 universities and research institutes in China and the
US is developing a framework of platforms based on concepts and methods in artificial societies and complex systems (see Figure 1). Our goal is to study integrated and
sustainable development of metropolitan transportation,
logistics, and ecosystems.

Research issues
Unfortunately, we cant solve transportation problems
by focusing on transportation systems alone. Rather, we
must consider the combined effects with other metropolitan systems. Artificial systems, based on artificial societies
and agent-modeling technology, are effective tools for this
purpose.3
Another issue is that no once-and-for-all solutions exist.
Metropolitan transportation, logistics, and ecosystems are
intrinsically open, dynamic, unpredictable, and complex
in their behaviors and effects. We must adopt a management and control strategy for those systems based on continuous investigation and improvement and should use
computational experiments with artificial systems to overcome the difficulty of experimenting with real systems.4
Finally, no optimal solutions exist. We must consider the
sensitivity of so-called optimal solutions to their assumed
ideal conditions and the unavoidable disparity between
ideal and actual conditions. We should adapt our thinking to
consider multiple effective solutions in dealing with urban
development problems. In such cases, we should apply the

1541-1672/04/$20.00  2004 IEEE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society

IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS

concept of parallel systems, which consists
of real and artificial systems and uses computational experiments and adaptive-control
methods to seek adaptive, dynamic, and
effective solutions.5

Addressing the problems
Our team consists of researchers from
systems engineering, computer science,
transportation, logistics, operations research,
plant science, economics, population studies,
management science, and social studies.
This effort represents an important application of artificial societies6,7 and will further development of the activity-based
TRANSIMS project8 and artificial transportation systems.9,10 Supported by the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences and a pending grant
from the Ministry of Science and Technology of Chinas National Key Fundamental
Research Program (the 973 projects), weve
already started work.
Were addressing several key problems,
the first of which is the modeling problem. Effective methods for modeling and
analyzing complex systems dont exist.
Were inclined to be agreeable with simple
objects or relationshipsits easy to reach
an agreement over simple matters, but this
isnt as easy with complicated matters.
So, building agent models based on agreeable simple objects or relationships is
useful. Then we can develop a bottom-up
approach to grow complex systems and
observe their behaviors through the interaction of simple but autonomous agents
according to specified rules in given environments. We can use this approach to develop agent-based models that focus on
behavior generation for integrated artificial systems for transportation, logistics,
and ecosystems.
Second is the experimenting problem.
Experimenting with complex systems is difficultoften even infeasibleespecially
when it involves human or societal subjects. So, artificial systems are helpful for
computational experiments, which are a
natural extension of computer simulations.
Artificial systems and computational experiments are ideal tools to validate goals and
objectives or evaluate strategies and decisions for coordinated and sustainable development of metropolitan transportation, logistics, and ecosystems.
Next is the decision-making problem.
Through the interaction between real and
JULY/AUGUST 2004

Problems
Techniques

Metropolitan
transportation

Strategic decision
validation/evaluation
Technical decision
validation/evaluation
Other support for
decision execution
Online support for
system operation

Metropolitan
logistics

Metropolitan
ecosystems

Other urbanization
problems

Validation/evaluation/analysis
platform for complex systems
 Artificial systems
 Computational experiments
 Parallel systems
 Metasynthesis and halls of workshops
 Parallel and distributed computing and data platforms

Other metropolitan
applications

Figure 1. A complex-systems platform for integrated and sustainable development of
metropolitan transportation, logistics, and ecosystems.

Area 1

Area 2

Artificial systems + computational experiments + parallel systems

Artificial
ecosystems

Metasynthesis and halls of workshops

Area 3

Area 4

Artificial
logistical
systems

Artificial
transportation
systems

Parallel and
distributed
computing
platforms

Prototype
systems and
application
platforms

Figure 2. Key issues and tasks for integrated, sustainable development of metropolitan
systems using artificial systems.

artificial systems, we can construct parallel
systems to perform computational experiments, test different strategies and decisions,
and evaluate their effects for solving complex
problems. Ideas and methods developed in
adaptive-control systems can be used effectively in the framework of parallel systems
for decision-making in complex systems.
Furthermore, artificial systems, computational experiments, and parallel systems provide both data sources and proving grounds
for decision support and analysis of complex
systems using metasynthesis.11 Fusing those
methods offers a possible direction for establishing a computational framework for facilitating integrated, coordinated, and sustainable development of metropolitan systems
www.computer.org/intelligent

under the principle of continuous investigation and improvement.
Finally, to solve the problems weve
described, we must also address the computing problem. How can we best use new
and advanced computing architectures and
environments, especially networked computing such as grid computing and peer-topeer computing?
To address these problems, the team
has specified seven major tasks in four
areas and assigned them to various team
members (see Figure 2) for a five-year
period. Figure 3 gives a roadmap for integrating those tasks into an effective, coherent framework for modeling, analysis, and
management of complex systems.
83

Metropolitan
transportation

Metropolitan
logistics

Metropolitan
ecosystems
Real systems

Problems and
difficulties

Parallel and
distributed
computing
methods

 Clustering analysis
Agent-based systems
 Typical process analysis
Rule-based systems
 Individuals and activity-based
networks
Self-organizing systems
 Metasynthesis and
decision-making
Systems and environments
Interconnected systems
Transportation

Concepts and
methods of
artificial
systems

 Clusters, functionalities
Agent-based systems
 Generation, purification
Rule-based systems
 Ecological activities
Self-organizing systems
 Human-ecosystem interaction
Systems and environments
Interconnected systems
Ecosystems

Logistics
Integrated transportation and logistics

Parallel and
distributed
computing
platforms

Data
processing
and data
mining

Artificial
logistics
systems

Artificial
systems and
computational
experiments
Artificial
ecosystems

Artificial systems

Metasynthesis
Artificial
systems

Computational
experiments

The second subtask is to develop methods and procedures for computational experiments, which will require
 Transition of computer simulations to
computational experiments
 Accelerated tests for pressure, limit,
failures, or disasters
 Emergence-based observation and explanation for computational experiments
 Multiscale behavior analysis based on
computational experiments
 Design, calibration, and verification of
computational experiments
The final subtask is to consider a theory
and methods for parallel systems, which
will involve

Interaction and
synchronization

Artificial
transportation
systems

 Cellular automata and their generalization for modeling agents
 Linguistic dynamic systems for describing agent behaviors
 Multiresolution observation and analysis
of agent behaviors
 Petri nets for specifying networking and
cooperation among agents
 Computational-intelligence methods and
game-theoretic strategies for decisionmaking by agents

Parallel
systems
and halls of
workshops

Real
systems
Parallel systems

 Developing a framework of parallel systems and protocols and processes of
interaction between real and artificial
systems
 Validating and evaluating strategies and
decisions using parallel systems
 Installing internal feedback mechanisms
for control and adaptation
 Performing perturbation analysis and
ordinal optimization for effective operation based on parallel systems
 Identifying behavior patterns using computational experiments and parallel systems

Validation by prototype systems and application platforms

Figure 3. Roadmap for integrated, sustainable development of metropolitan systems
using artificial systems. (Dashed lines represent information that leads to modification
in the directed box; solid lines represent other information or decision flows.)

Area 1: Artificial systems for real
complex systems
The first areas goal is to establish a
computational theory that uses artificial
systems as alternatives to real complex
systems for validating or evaluating computational experiments (see Figure 4) and
84

for managing or controlling parallel systems (see Figure 5). Accomplishing this
task involves three subtasks.
The first subtask is the agent-based
modeling, design, analysis, and synthesis
of artificial systems. This subtask will
require
www.computer.org/intelligent

Area 2: Artificial systems for
metropolitan transportation, logistics,
and ecosystems
Using artificial systems to study complex systems is a natural extension of computer simulations as computational power
grows. To maintain coherence and achieve
integration of different artificial systems
for transportation, logistics, and ecosystems, the systems use and share common
agent models. Figure 6 presents the major
components for artificial systems.
This area involves three tasks. The first
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS

task is designing, constructing, and analyzing artificial transportation systems, which
will require
 Using agent models to model traffic
behaviors in terms of selecting trips,
destinations, times, means, and routes
 Having interaction between transportation and social systems, economic systems, population, resources, environments, and information
 Estimating and analyzing transportation
capacities in different situations
 Validating and evaluating transportation
strategies and decisions using computational experiments and parallel systems
 Using artificial transportation systems
to create a standardized performanceevaluation procedure for traffic management and control systems
The second task is designing, constructing, and analyzing artificial logistical systems, which will require
 Using agent models and their calibration
for logistical activities
 Creating self-organizing and learning artificial systems based on supply chains and
service chains for logistical operations
 Performing emergence-based observation of logistical behaviors and their
interaction with transportation systems
 Validating and evaluating logistical
strategies and decisions using computational experiments and parallel systems
 Using artificial logistical systems to create a standardized performance-evaluation procedure for logistical management and control systems
The third task is designing, constructing,
and analyzing artificial ecosystems, which
will require
 Using agent models for plant growth and
plant-environment interaction
 Regulating ecosystems and transportation systems and ensuring proper interaction between them
 Estimating and analyzing the ecosystems
carrying capacities in terms of population,
transportation, and logistical development
 Sampling and generating synthetic human
population and plant distribution
 Validating and evaluating ecological
strategies and decisions using computational experiments and parallel systems
JULY/AUGUST 2004

Proposals and modifications of solutions
for complex systems

Validation of
objectives

Specification of
objectives
Agent-based
artificial systems

Evaluation of
decisions

Decisions and
task assignment

Agents Environments Rules

Emergence-based
observation

Computational
experiment design

Figure 4. Computational experiments for behavior analysis and decision evaluation of
complex systems.

Real systems

Artificial systems

Management
and control

Management
and control
Observation and
evaluation

Control and
observation

Management
and control

Observation and
evaluation

Experiments and
evaluation

Learning and
training

Figure 5. Parallel systems for management and control of complex systems.

Legal and
regulation
subsystem

Infrastructure
subsystem

Logistical
subsystem

Social and
economic
subsystem

Transportation
subsystem

Parallel and distributed
computing subsystem
Metasynthesis subsystem

Weather and
environmental
subsystem

Ecological and
resource subsystem

Decision and
objective subsystem
Figure 6. Integrated artificial systems for transportation, logistics, and ecosystems.

Area 3: Metasynthesis and halls of
workshops
Metasynthesis and halls of workshops are
methods and tools proposed and developed
www.computer.org/intelligent

in the late 1980s by a research group led by
Hsue-Shen Tsien, the founder of engineering cybernetics11 and the Chinese Space
Program, and Ru-Wei Dai for dealing with
85

Experts

Experts

Experts

Experts

Workshop interface

Workshop interface

Workshop interface

Workshop interface

Internet/intranet

Metasynthesis and hall of workshops for decision support and analysis
Interface for workshop supporting services

Data Model Artificial
Information
Analysis/evaluation/synthesis based on
mining bases systems synchronization computational experiments and parallel systems

Databases for transportation,
logistics, and ecosystems

Qualitative and
Qualitative and Qualitative and
quantitative
quantitative
quantitative
analysis system analysis system analysis system
for transportation
for logistics
for ecosystems

Figure 7. Metasynthesis and halls of workshops for decision support and analysis of
metropolitan systems.

open, complex, and huge systems.11,12 This
areas task is to use artificial systems, computational experiments, and parallel systems
to develop application-specific metasynthesis and halls of workshops for decision support and analysis of metropolitan transportation, logistics, and ecosystems (see Figure
7). This task will require
 Human-machine interaction-based metasynthesis for decision support and analysis
 Architectures and strategies of halls of
workshops for decision support and
analysis
 Workflows of halls of workshops for
decision-making support
 Software support and network environment for halls of workshops
 An integrated validation and evaluation
environment based on metasynthesis,
computational experiments, and parallel
systems
Area 4: Computing platforms and
prototypes
Powerful, effective computing and dataprocessing platforms are essential to the success of this team endeavor. The final two
86

tasks are to develop two types of computing
platforms: a grid-computing platform for
management and control, and a peer-to-peer
platform for research and development.
Prototype systems and field applications in
three major cities (Shanghai, Shenzhen,
and Jinan) will be conducted to validate
and evaluate the theory and framework developed in this project.
The platform for managing and controlling parallel systems will require
 Open computing architectures and processes for artificial systems and their
parallel and distributed models
 Petri nets for specifying and modeling
parallel and distributed computing processes of artificial systems
 Data management, mining, fusion, and
reduction for artificial systems
 Effective parallel and distributed algorithms and synchronization methods for
computational experiments, parallel systems, and halls of workshops
 Computing environments, tools, and
intelligent user interfaces for computational experiments, parallel systems, and
halls of workshops
www.computer.org/intelligent

The platform for creating prototype systems and applications will require
 Prototype systems for field applications
in Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Jinan
 An integrated control and management
platform for traffic systems
 An integrated scheduling and management platform for logistical systems
 An integrated analysis and management
platform for ecosystems
 Validation and evaluation of field testing
and applications

B

y fusing field-specific knowledge from
the disciplines of individual researchers, we
aim to use a multidisciplinary approach to
reevaluate R&D strategies in transportation,
logistics, and ecosystems. We also plan to
establish a computational theory and framework with artificial systems, computational
experiments, parallel systems, and metasynthesis for decision support and analysis
of complex systems in general, and for
integrated, coordinated, and sustainable
development of metropolitan transportation, logistics, and ecosystems in specific.
Eventually, we hope to develop a computational framework that lets us model, analyze, and synthesize complex urban and
metropolitan social systems from qualitative validation to quantitative evaluation.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded partly by the Outstanding
Young Scientist Research Fund (Grant 60125310)
and the Key Project on Networked Systems (Grant
60334020) from the National Natural Science
Foundation, a Shandong 863 project (Grant
030335) from Shandong Provincial Government,
and a 973 project (Grant 2002CB312200) from the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.
We greatly appreciate support from the ATLAS
(Advanced Traffic and Logistics Algorithms and
Systems) center at the University of Arizona,
PARCS (Program for Advanced Research in Complex Systems), and Ruwei Dai of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences.

References
1. F.Y. Wang et al., A Complex Systems
Approach for Studying Integrated Development of Transportation, Logistics, and
Ecosystems, J. Complex Systems and Complexity Science, vol. 1, no. 2, 2004, pp. 6069.
2. K. Leitner and R. Kasperson, Making Green
IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS

Development a Choice, UNDP Chinas
National Human Development Report, 2002.
3. F.Y. Wang and S.J. Lansing, From Artificial
Life to Artificial Societies: New Methods in
Studying Social Complex Systems, J. Complex Systems and Complexity Science, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2004, pp. 3341.
4. F.Y. Wang, Computational Experiments for
Behavior Analysis and Decision Evaluation
of Complex Systems, J. System Simulations,
vol. 16, no. 5, 2004, pp. 893898.

Fei-Yue Wang is a professor at the University of Arizona and the director of the universitys
Program for Advanced Studies in Complex Systems. Hes also a research scientist at, and the
director of, the Key Laboratory of Complex Systems and Intelligence Science at the Chinese
Academy of Sciences. Contact him at feiyue@sie.arizona.edu.
Shuming Tang is a research scientist at the Shandong Academy of Sci-

ences. She received her PhD from the Intelligent Control and Systems
Engineering Center at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Contact her at
shuming.tang@mail.ia.ac.cn.

5. F.Y. Wang, Parallel Systems for Management and Control of Complex Systems, J.
Control and Decision, vol. 19, no. 3, 2004,
pp. 485490.

report LA-1658, Los Alamos Natl Lab, 1999.

6. C.H. Builder and S.C. Bankes, Artificial Societies: A Concept for Basic Research on the
Societal Impacts of Information Technology,
RAND Report P-7740, RAND Corp., 1991.

9. F.Y. Wang et al., Toward Intelligent Transportation Systems for the 2008 Olympics,
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 18, no. 6, 2003,
pp. 811.

7. J.M. Epstein and R.L. Axtell, Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom
Up, Brooking Inst. Press and MIT Press, 1996.

10. F.Y. Wang and S.M. Tang, Concept and
Framework of Artificial Transportation Systems, J. Complex Systems and Complexity
Science, vol. 1, no. 2, 2004, pp. 5259.

8. C.L. Barrett et al., Transportation Analysis Simulation System (TRANSIMS): Overview, tech.

11. D.L. Wang and R.W. Dai, Behavior Proto-

PURPOSE The IEEE Computer Society is the
worlds largest association of computing professionals, and is the leading provider of technical
information in the field.

Term Expiring 2004: Jean M. Bacon, Ricardo
Baeza-Yates, Deborah M. Cooper, George V. Cybenko,
Haruhisha Ichikawa, Thomas W. Williams, Yervant
Zorian
Term Expiring 2005: Oscar N. Garcia, Mark A.
Grant, Michel Israel, Stephen B. Seidman, Kathleen M.
Swigger, Makoto Takizawa, Michael R. Williams
Term Expiring 2006: Mark Christensen, Alan
Clements, Annie Combelles, Ann Gates, Susan Mengel, James W. Moore, Bill Schilit
Next Board Meeting: 5 Nov. 2004, New Orleans

IEEE OFFICERS
President: ARTHUR W. WINSTON
President-Elect: W. CLEON ANDERSON
Past President: MICHAEL S. ADLER
Executive Director: DANIEL J. SENESE
Secretary: MOHAMED EL-HAWARY
Treasurer: PEDRO A. RAY
VP, Educational Activities: JAMES M. TIEN
VP, Pub. Services & Products: MICHAEL R.LIGHTNER
VP, Regional Activities: MARC T. APTER
VP, Standards Association: JAMES T. CARLO
VP, Technical Activities: RALPH W. WYNDRUM JR.
IEEE Division V Director: GENE H. HOFFNAGLE
IEEE Division VIII Director: JAMES D. ISAAK
President, IEEE-USA: JOHN W. STEADMAN

12. H.S. Tsien, Engineering Cybernetics,
McGraw-Hill, 1954.
13. X.S. Qian (H.S. Tsien), J.Y. Yu, and R.W.
Dai, A New Field of Science? Open Complex Giant Systems and Their Methodology, Nature Magazine, vol. 13, no. 1, 1991,
pp. 310.

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

MEMBERSHIP Members receive the monthly magazine Computer, discounts, and opportunities to serve (all activities are led by volunteer
members). Membership is open to all IEEE
members, affiliate society members, and others
interested in the computer field.
COMPUTER SOCIETY WEB SITE
The IEEE Computer Societys Web site, at
www.computer.org, offers information and
samples from the societys publications and conferences, as well as a broad range of information
about technical committees, standards, student
activities, and more.
BOARD OF GOVERNORS

col of Expert Groups for Meta-Synthesis and
Halls of Workshops, Management Sciences,
vol. 4, no. 2, 2001, pp. 16.

COMPUTER SOCIETY OFFICES
Headquarters Office
1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20036-1992
Phone: +1 202 371 0101
Fax: +1 202 728 9614
E-mail: hq.ofc@computer.org
Publications Office
10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014
Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314
Phone:+1 714 821 8380
E-mail: help@computer.org
Membership and Publication Orders:
Phone: +1 800 272 6657
Fax: +1 714 821 4641
E-mail: help@computer.org
Asia/Pacific Office
Watanabe Building
1-4-2 Minami-Aoyama,Minato-ku
Tokyo107-0062, Japan
Phone: +81 3 3408 3118
Fax: +81 3 3408 3553
E-mail: tokyo.ofc@computer.org

President:
CARL K. CHANG*
Computer Science Dept.
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011-1040
Phone: +1 515 294 4377
Fax: +1 515 294 0258
c.chang@computer.org
President-Elect: GERALD L. ENGEL*
Past President: STEPHEN L. DIAMOND*
VP, Educational Activities: MURALI VARANASI*
VP, Electronic Products and Services:
LOWELL G. JOHNSON (1ST VP)*
VP, Conferences and Tutorials:
CHRISTINA SCHOBER
VP, Chapters Activities:
RICHARD A. KEMMERER (2ND VP)*
VP, Publications: MICHAEL R. WILLIAMS*
VP, Standards Activities: JAMES W. MOORE*
VP, Technical Activities: YERVANT ZORIAN*
Secretary: OSCAR N. GARCIA*
Treasurer:RANGACHAR KASTURI
20032004 IEEE Division V Director:
GENE H. HOFFNAGLE
20032004 IEEE Division VIII Director:
JAMES D. ISAAK
2004 IEEE Division VIII Director-Elect:
STEPHEN L. DIAMOND*
Computer Editor in Chief:DORIS L. CARVER
Executive Director: DAVID W. HENNAGE
* voting member of the Board of Governors
 nonvoting member of the Board of Governors

EXECUTIVE

STAFF

Executive Director: DAVID W. HENNAGE
Assoc. Executive Director: ANNE MARIE KELLY
Publisher: ANGELA BURGESS
Assistant Publisher: DICK PRICE
Director, Administration:
VIOLET S. DOAN
Director, Information Technology & Services:
ROBERT CARE

