See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/222453416

Articial intelligence and expert systems in ecology and
natural resource management
Article in Ecological Modelling  July 1989
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3800(89)90066-5

CITATIONS

READS

72

2,752

1 author:
Edward J Rykiel
53 PUBLICATIONS 3,459 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Comparison of the movements of wintering and resident birds in urban parks View project

Grassland Ecology View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Edward J Rykiel on 14 November 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Ecological Modelling, 46 (1989) 3-8

3

Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam - Printed in The Netherlands
Editorial

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND EXPERT SYSTEMS IN ECOLOGY
AND NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

EDWARD J. RYKIEL, Jr.
Biosystems Group, Industrial Engineering Department, Texas A & M University, College Statior,.,
TX 77843 (U.S.A.)

ABSTRACT
Rykiel, E.J., Jr., 1989. Artificial intelligence and expert systems in ecology and natural
resource management. Ecol. Modelling, 46: 3-8.
Ecologists have a variety of tools for collecting and analyzing data, but relatively few tools
that facilitate ecological reasoning. Up to this time, simulation models have been the basic
means of organizing ecological knowledge in a way that can be rapidly processed by
computer. Technologies for computer-based manipulation of knowledge have been developed
in artificial intelligence. The areas of ecological science in which this technology is likely to
prove important include: modelling and simulation, integration of qualitative and quantitative knowledge, theoretical development, and, natural resource management. Researchers and
managers in both basic and applied ecology will be affected by these developments as
AI-derived technologies are added to the ecological toolkit.

INTRODUCTION
As it is currently taught a n d practiced, ecology reflects in large m e a s u r e
the collection of ever more data. Ecologists delight in p o i n t i n g out the
complexity of ecological systems, the difficulty of p e r f o r m i n g controlled,
replicated experiments, the impossibility of e x p e r i m e n t i n g on large-scale
systems, the i m m e n s e n u m b e r of variables to be considered, the bewildering
array of ecological behaviors that are possible, the exasperating ability of
living organisms to acclimate, adapt, evolve. Yet, with the exception of
c o m p u t e r simulation modelling, ecologists have developed, or a d a p t e d f r o m
other disciplines, virtually no c o m p u t e r - b a s e d tools that might help t h e m
think a b o u t this mass of i n f o r m a t i o n .
The ecological knowledge base, s p a n n i n g as it does the range from
physiology to the biosphere, is a l r e a d y e n o r m o u s a n d growing continually.
This huge knowledge base challenges us to develop new a n d m o r e efficient
ways of organizing, processing, a n d analyzing ecological k n o w l e d g e to
0304-3800/89/$03.50

 1989 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.

emphasize and facilitate the process of ecological reasoning, rather than data
reduction. Moreover, it is essential to take up this challenge if ecological
science is to have any impact on the social, political, and management
decisions influencing the course of the biosphere.
Can artificial intelligence, with its emphasis on understanding how the
human mind organizes and processes massive amounts of information, help?
The technologies emerging from AI research may provide the high speed,
computerized tools and techniques that aid ecologists in thinking and
reasoning about ecological complexity, unifying theory, and mechanisms for
applying ecological knowledge to real problems. Although a period of
exploration and testing is necessary to delimit the scientific role that AI can
play in ecology, it is certain that some of the techniques will become an
accepted part of the ecologist's toolkit. The articles in this special issue
represent some of the first steps being taken to adapt AI techniques to
ecological research. In addition, these papers illustrate the major research
areas briefly sketched below.

Artificial intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science that is principally concerned with using computational models to understand how humans think (Tanimoto, 1987). Major research areas include expert systems
(ES), search methods, knowledge representation, logical and probabilistic
reasoning, learning, natural language understanding, vision, and robotics
(Cohen and Feigenbaum, 1982). The catch phrase, 'AI (or expert systems)
techniques', generally refers to computer methods developed in one or more
of those areas. Expert systems technology (Jackson, 1986), for example,
represents an integration of methods from several AI research areas such as
search methods, knowledge representation, and logical reasoning (production systems). For a long time, relatively little AI research found a pragmatic
use outside of academia. However, the development of expert systems led
many researchers from numerous other fields to explore the potential
applications of AI to their particular disciplines. Expert systems technology
thus became the major development that led to the explosion of interest in
artificial intelligence that we are currently experiencing. However, it is by no
means the only AI technique applicable to ecological research.

Expert systems
An expert system is a computer program that can solve problems in a
specific area of knowledge (the problem domain) as well as a human expert
(O'Keefe et al., 1987), or, that automates tasks that are normally performed

by specially trained or talented people (Shannon et al., 1985). Expert
systems research led to a methodology for separating knowledge in the form
of rules, principally IV/THEY statements, from the procedures used to
invoke these rules to solve a problem (Buchanan and Shortliffe, 1985). A
collection of IF/THEN statements is only one of various methods used for
knowledge representation. At its simplest, an expert system therefore consists of a knowledge base containing the rules and a procedure (inference
engine) for processing the rules. This separation of knowledge from procedure has also given rise to the terminology 'knowledge-based systems'.
The principal method of developing an expert system is to interview the,
expert intensively to develop rules by which he or she solves problems or
produces a diagnosis/evaluation. The process of extracting, formatting, and
encoding an expert's knowledge in a computer program is referred to as
knowledge engineering. Because the inference engine can be constructed
independently of the knowledge base, it is possible to build an expert system
'shell'; that is, a program that requires the user to provide only the
knowledge base. The user can therefore become both the expert and the
knowledge engineer. There are now a number of implementations of expert
system shells available (e.g., Epp et al., 1988).
The image of computer programs serving as experts has diverted attention
away from the use of A I / E S technology for ecological research (in contrast
to applications) (e.g., Loehle, 1987; Noble 1987). The exercise of building an
expert system often reveals weaknesses in existing knowledge that point to
needed research. These systems also serve to indicate the quality of decisionmaking that is possible with existing knowledge (e.g., Starfield and
Bleloch, 1983, 1986). Expert systems techniques can be used to produce both
stand-alone applications and components for other types of systems (i.e.,
embedded expert systems). These techniques can be used to add so-called
'intelligent' components to standard programs and models (Coulson et al.,
1987). But most importantly, A I / E S techniques can be used to investigate
ecological problems, particularly those associated with the development of
coherent theory and ecological reasoning processes. Artifical intelligence
methodologies, including but not limited to expert systems, may ultimately
prove useful as tools for exploring ecological issues and developing ecological theory (Rykiel and Mayer, 1988).
MAJOR RESEARCH AREAS

Modelling and simulation
Perhaps the most immediate impact of AI technologies will be on the way
ecologists organize, develop, and implement models. Two developments are

worth emphasizing. The first is the development of specialized computing
environments that allow a researcher to concentrate on the problem domain
rather than mechanics of manipulating the computer. Ecological modellers
have used one basic knowledge representation scheme up to now, the
equation. Although elegant in many respects, equations severely limit the
kinds of knowledge that can be represented and how knowledge is organized.
Many ecological computer models are merely procedures for producing
numerical approximations to the solutions of several to many equations.
These models range from difficult to impossible for a non-modeller to
parameterize and operate, and especially to understand the resulting output.
Thus, the majority of the research effort is devoted to producing and
debugging the model with much less time spent on thinking about the
problem that inspired the modelling effort to begin with. An ecological
computing environment should allow an ecologist to think mostly about the
ecological problem and much less about the mechanics of computing. The
first halting steps toward such modelling environments are now being taken.
The second development worth mentioning is object-oriented programming systems (OOPS). In current modelling technology, ecological entities
are generally represented by variables or vectors. For example, in a forest
growth model, a tree might be represented by a vector of numbers that
indicates its age, Dan, and height. However, there is no object in the model
called a 'tree' because knowledge representation by variable (or equation)
does not provide a means of defining a tree object. In addition, there is no
particular data structure that associates these variables as a tree. It would
seem to be much more natural to build a model using the ecological objects
ecologists are familar with. Object-oriented programming is based on this
idea of a set of interacting objects that are meaningfully defined in the
appropriate scientific context. Examples of computer languages that incorporate the object-oriented approach are Smalltalk and C + + . Object-oriented programming may be particularly effective for hierarchical representations of ecological systems since OOPS are inherently hierarchical.

Integration of quafitative and quantitative knowledge
Much ecological knowledge is qualitative and fuzzy, expressed verbally
and diagrammatically. Ecologists have no effective technology for using this
vast knowledge in a meaningful way. The core of ecology does not yet exist
in the form of an accepted set of mathematical expressions. There is no
evident point to waiting around for ecology to become primarily quantitative, and in the mean time ignoring the predictive power of qualitative
knowledge. In reality, ecologists have considerable knowledge in their heads
and not many ways to make this knowledge explicit, well-organized, and

computer-processable. Artificial intelligence research may provide tools in
the form of symbolic computing techniques for manipulating qualitative
knowledge. Many questions of interest in ecology (and especially to decisionmakers) can be answered in terms of 'better or worse, more or less,
sooner or later,' etc.
The search for quantitative knowledge, must continue to discover ecological relationships that can be expressed and manipulated with the power of
mathematics. The challenge is to integrate quantitative knowledge with
qualitative knowledge to deal with the complexity of ecological and environmental systems. Scientifically valid qualitative predictions can be made even
when quantitative predictions cannot. Often, quantitative methods are used
to arrive at a qualitative prediction or decision. When quantitative methods
are inadequate or lacking, estimates, predictions, and decisions must still be
made in both scientific and management situations.

Theoretical development
It is perfectly valid to ask the ecologist to describe the rules by which
ecological systems operate. Science is after all a search for the rules that
describe the way nature behaves. We have no evidence at this point in time
that there is a simple set of rules for ecological systems. Ecological systems
are complex and it is not unreasonable to think that there may be hundreds
or thousands of rules needed to describe, for example, the behaviour of a
salt marsh. Theoretical development is hampered by the limited mental
capacity we have for figuring out the consequences of even small knowledge
bases. Why not take advantage of any technology that can assist us in
determining the logical consequences of complicated ecological chains of
reasoning.
AI technologies may eventually prove useful for theoretical developmenl
in at least three ways: organization of computer-compatible knowledge
bases including both qualitative and quantitative knowledge; rapid assessment of assumptions, hypotheses, or other ideas in a theoretical context; and
determining the consequences and logical consistency of long and com-.
plicated reasoning pathways.

Natural resource management and policy analysis
This is an area where expert systems are likely to play an increasingly
important role. It is one of the few readily identifiable ways to introduce
sound ecological knowledge into the management environment. All resource
management agencies engage in planning activities that can be enhanced by
A I / E S technologies. To the extent that ecological considerations can be

factored into these systems, the influence of ecological science on the
decisionmaking process can be increased. Resource applications can also be
used to evaluate the impact of alternative management policies. While policy
analysis has not been given much attention in ecological circles, it is likely to
become increasingly important for translating ecological insights into
management practices.
CONCLUSION

Artificial intelligence techniques are now being investigated for application to ecological science. At this very early stage of development, research is
focused on how to use A I / E S technologies to further ecological research.
The role that this technology can play in ecology will be decided over the
course of the next decade. Many current expectations will fall by the
wayside, but some will be realized and lead to useful tools for ecological
research and for the application of ecological knowledge to management.
REFERENCES
Buchanan, B.G. and Shortliffe, E.H., 1985. Rule-Based Expert Systems. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, 748 pp.
Cohen, P.R. and Feigenbaum, E.A. (Editors), 1982. The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence,
Vols. I-IlL Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1476 pp.
Coulson, R.N., Folse, L.J. and Loh, D.K., 1987. Artificial intelligence and natural resource
management. Science, 237: 262-267.
Epp, H., Kalin, M. and Miller, D., 1988. PC software for artificial intelligence applications.
Science, 240: 824-830.
Jackson, P., 1986. Introduction to Expert Systems. Addison-Wesley, Workingham, England,
246 pp.
Loehle, C., 1987. Applying artificial intelligence techniques to ecological modeling. Ecol.
Modelling, 38: 191-212.
Noble, I.R., 1987. The role of expert systems in vegetation science. Vegetatio, 69: 115-121.
O'Keefe, R.M., Balci, O. and Smith, E.P., 1987. Validating expert systems. IEEE Expert, 2:
81-90.
Rykiel, E.J., Jr. and Mayer, R.D., 1988. Modelling grazing systems: an expert systems
approach. In: Proc. 1988 Forage and Grassland Conf., 13-15 Arpil 1988, Baton Rouge,
LA. American Forage and Grassland Council, Belleville, PA, pp. 294-304.
Shannon, R.E., Mayer, R.J. and Adelsberger, H.H. 1985. Expert systems and simulation.
Simulation, 44: 275-284.
Starfield, A.M. and Bleloch, A.L., 1983. Expert systems: an approach to problems in
ecological management that are difficult to quantify. J. Environ. Manage., 16: 261-268.
Starfield, A.M. and Bleloch, A.L., 1986. Building Models for Conservation and Wildlife
Management. Macmillan, New York, pp. 211-232.
Tanimoto, S.L., 1987. The Elements of Artificial Intelligence. Computer Science Press,
Rockville, MD, 527 pp.

View publication stats

