COVER STORY

E

very minute, on average, at least one person dies
in a crash. If you read this article from start to finish, 30 or more deaths will have occurred across
the globe by the time you are done. Auto accidents will also injure at least 10 million people
this year, two or three million of them seriously.
All told, the hospital bills, damaged property, and other costs
will add up to 13 percent of the worlds gross domestic product,
according to the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. For the United States alone, the tally
will amount to roughly US $200 billion. And, of course, the

will grow more capable and more widely available, until they
become standard equipment on luxury vehicles. Meanwhile,
researchers will be bringing the first cooperative safety systems
to market. These will raise active safety technology to the next
level, enabling vehicles to communicate and coordinate responses
to avoid collisions. Note that to avoid liability claims in the event
of collisions between cars equipped with adaptive cruise control
systems, manufacturers of these systems and the car companies
that use them are careful not to refer to them as safety devices.
Instead, they are being marketed as driver aids, mere conveniences made possible by new technologies.

Keeping Cars
Adaptive cruise control
is here, the first step toward
systems that can help cars
keep their distance on
crowded highways
BY WILLIE D. JONES

Further in the future, developments by private research groups
and publicly funded entities such as the U.S. Department of
Transportations Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) Joint
Program Office, and Japans Advanced Cruise-Assist Highway
System Research Association, may make driving a completely
automated experience. Communication among sensors and
processors embedded not only in vehicles but in roads, signs, and
guard rails are expected to let cars race along practically bumper
to bumper at speeds above 100 km/h while passengers snooze,
read, or watch television.

Assistant Editor

IEEE SPECTRUM

 September 2001

Whats that up ahead?

40

losses that matter most are not even captured by these statistics,
because theres no way to put a dollar value on them.
Engineers have been chipping away at these staggering numbers for a long time. Air bags and seat belts save tens of thousands of people a year. Supercomputers now let designers create car frames and bodies that protect the people inside by
absorbing as much of the energy of a crash as possible. As a
result, the number of fatalities per million miles of vehicle travel
has decreased. But the ultimate solution, and the only one that
will save far more lives, limbs, and money, is to keep cars from
smashing into each other in the first place.
That is exactly what engineers in the United States, Europe,
and Japan are trying to do. They are applying advanced microprocessors, radars, high-speed ICs, and signal-processing chips
and algorithms in R&D programs that mark an about-face in the
automotive industry: from safety systems that kick in after an accident occurs, attempting to minimize injury and damage, to ones
that prevent collisions altogether.
The first collision-avoidance features are already on the
road, as pricey adaptive cruise control options on a small
group of luxury cars. Over the next few years, these systems

Such scenarios are 20 years away at least. Fortunately, automakers can do a great deal to improve safety with present technology.
They have already started equipping high-end vehicles with sensors that detect motion and obstacles, coupled to processors that
respond instantly to whatever is detected.
These adaptive cruise control (ACC) systems, which add $1500
to $3000 to the cost of a car, use laser beams or radar to measure
the distance from the vehicle they are in to the car ahead and its
speed relative to theirs. If a car crosses into the lane ahead, say,
and the distance is now less than the preset minimum (typically
a 1- or 2-second interval of separation), the system applies the
brakes, slowing the car with a maximum deceleration of 3.5 m/s2
until it is following at the desired distance. If the leading car
speeds up or moves out of the lane, the system opens the throttle until the trailing car has returned to the cruise control speed
set by the driver.
In May 1998, Toyota became the first to introduce an ACC system on a production vehicle when it unveiled a laser-based system
for its Progres compact luxury sedan, which it sold in Japan. Then
Nissan followed suit with a radar-based system, in the companys
Cima 41LV-2, a luxury sedan also sold only in Japan. In September

1999, Jaguar began offering an ACC for its XKR coupes and
convertibles sold in Germany and Britain. Like many ACC systems, it is the result of a group effort: Delphi Delco Electronic
Systems supplies the radar sensing unit; TRW Automotive Electronics, the brake control; and Siemens, the assembly that
manipulates the throttle.
Last fall, Mercedes-Benz and Lexus joined the adaptive cruise
control movement. Lexus offers an ACC option for its top-of-theline LS430; at the moment, it is the only ACC system available
in the United States. Mercedes system is an option on its
C-Class and S-Class models, which are available in Europe; it
was developed by M/A-Com, Lowell, Mass., and uses a radar
made by Filtran Microcircuits Inc., in West Caldwell, N.J.

from

Although conventional cruise control is a much more popular option in North America than it is in Europe and Asia,
none of the Big Three U.S. automakers has an ACC system
in production yet. General Motors (GM) and Ford, however,
are collaborating on a Collision Avoidance Metrics Project,
whose results are expected to influence the companies early
ACC offerings. Both plan to introduce ACC systems for calendar year 2002, GM in a Cadillac, and Ford in a Lincoln. By
then, Opel, Saab, and Volvo will have also made systems
available as options on some of their cars, according to Raymond Schubert, a researcher at Tier One, a Mountain View,
Calif.based automotive electronics market research firm.
Several automotive electronics firms have also built ACC sys-

Crashing

 September 2001

ROB MAGIERI

IEEE SPECTRUM

41

COVER STORY

tradeoffs. Lidar is less expensive to produce and easier to
package but performs poorly in rain and snow. The light
beams are narrower than water droplets and snowflakes,
pushing down the signal-to-noise ratio in bad weather. Which
is precisely when you need it most, argues Tony Stewart, a
project engineer at Fujitsu Ten Ltd., Plymouth, Mich., which
is working on an advanced ACC using radar. Another problem is that accumulations of mud, dust, or snow on the car
can block lidar beams.
Radar versus lidar
At present, only one automaker, Lexus, uses a laser-based
All of the ACC systems available today are built around sen- ACC system, in its LS430 luxury sedan. System engineers
sors that detect the vehicle ahead through the use of either have acknowledged lidars shortcomings and taken steps to
radar or lidar (light detecting and ranging, the laser-based make the system unavailable in situations where the weather
analog to radar). The choice of sensor presents classic design may limit its effectiveness. According to the LS430 owners
manual, the system will automatically shut itself
off if the windshield wipers are turned to a rapid
setting, indicating heavy rain or snow; if someA prototype fusion processor from Fujitsu Ten Ltd. depends on optical and
thing activates the anti-lock braking system (which
radar sensors to move a car automatically at the varying speeds of traffic. A
helps the driver maintain steering control and
camera and radar report on the width, distance , and speed of objects ahead,
reduces stopping distances during emergency
and the processor combines the data, feeding it to a unit that controls the car.
braking situations); or if the vehicle skid control
system detects the slipping of tires on turns that is
common in wet weather.
Image-processing unit
and stereo camera
Radar-based systems, on the other hand, can
see at least 150 meters ahead in fog or rain heavy
enough to cut the drivers ability to see down to
10 meters or less. The choice of radar or lidar
depends on the designers philosophy: proponents of the laser-based systems insist that a colMillimeter-wave
lision-warning
system should not work far beyond
radar
what the driver can see. To do so, they say, would
encourage people to drive too fast in conditions of
poor visibility and lead to crashes when the collision-warning system failed to detect an obstacle.
Headway
Conversely, proponents of radar-based systems
control unit
argue that the driver needs the most help in conditions of poor visibility.
Radar-based systems employ a variety of sensFusion sensor
ing and processing methods to determine the posiMillimetertion and speed of the vehicle ahead. A fairly simple
Best signal
wave radar
data
scheme (like the one used by Mercedes) switches
rapidly among three beams by changing feed points
Image
Fusion
along the antenna, creating a scanning effect inexStereo camera
processor
processor
Edge data
pensively and with no moving parts. The beams are
wide enough to ensure that each overlaps those
adjacent, providing a combined 12-degree field of
Distance, relative speed
view. An advantage is that the wider beams permit
the use of a smaller antenna.
More advanced and costlier sensing schemes rely
on
an antenna that is mechanically scanned and
Headway
control unit
that emits a narrow beam. These systems scan
between 64 and 128 points in the radars field of
view, also typically 12 degrees, so that resolution is
much higher than for a three-beam system. The
beams are much narrower than in the three-beam
Dashboard
Brake
Throttle
models, however, so the antenna has to be larger.
display
And the multiplicity of beams requires much more
tems, hoping to carve out a niche in a market that is expected to
climb above $2 billion a year within a decade. Autocruise, a joint
venture between TRW Automotive Electronics Inc., Cleveland,
Ohio, and Thomson-CSF in Paris, introduced a radar-based system in March 2000. Eaton Vorad Technologies LLC, Galesburg,
Mich., also makes radar-based systems for cars and trucks [see
Big Rigs Need Protection, Too, p. 44]. Neither offering has yet
won a commitment from a major automaker.

42

STEVE STANKIEWICZ

IEEE SPECTRUM

 September 2001

Next Generation of Cruise Control

processing power to handle the streams of data that pour out as
the radar scans across the multiple points of focus to determine the leading cars position and speed.
Regardless of the scanning mechanism, the radars typically
operate in the millimeter-wave region at 7677 GHz. The
automakers refused to alter the shape or construction of their
vehicles to accommodate ACC, so designers had to build systems small enough to be mounted inside a cars front grille.
That stringent size requirement in turn demanded a compact
antenna, which in turn forced the use of the high frequencies,
antenna size being inversely related to frequency. At 7677 GHz,
frequencies are high enough to work with small antennas, yet not
so high that the components are exotic and stupendously expensive. A typical automotive radar, produced by Delphi Delco Electronics Systems, of Kokomo, Ind., is roughly the size of two
stacked paperback booksjust 14 by 7 by 10 cm.
Engineers considered frequencies even higher than 76 GHz,
such as 94 and 125 GHz, but the components required are prohibitively expensive at the moment. All
the same, engineers have not given up
on higher frequencies, which would let
them shrink the antennas, whose size
dominates the overall system size.
Smaller units would give designers
more flexibility in the location of the
devices. Instead of being centered
behind the cars front grill, which is
where they must go today, they could be mounted on a cars rearview or side mirrors or near a headlight.
Such leading-edge technologies as monolithic microwave
integrated circuits (MMICs), initially developed for military
and communications applications, also contribute mightily to
compactness. Engineers put an entire radar system on a handful of these circuits. The chip set includes a microprocessor that
communicates with a digital signal processor and the radars
scanning mechanism. It feeds a separate control computer,
which decides whether to engage the throttle or brakes.
Automakers are now striving to integrate all of these functions into a single chip, said Osman Altan, an engineer at
General Motors Research and Development Center, in Warren, Mich. Such an advance would make the systems cheaper
to produce and less vulnerable to interference.
Yet another enabling technology is flip-chip packaging, an
advanced and compact method of making electrical connections to an IC. Besides permitting more accurate placement of
more numerous chip leads, it lowers production costs and
enhances ruggedness and reliability.

100 km/h, that would amount to a distance between cars of
less than 14 meters (roughly two car lengths).
An experiment to try out these ideas was conducted by
researchers at California Partners for Advanced Transit and
Highways (PATH), a collaboration between the California
Department of Transportation, the University of California,
and others. In that trial, a group of three test vehicles used a
communication protocol in which the lead car broadcast information about its speed and acceleration to the rest of the
group every 20 ms. Additionally, each car transmitted information about its speed and acceleration to the car behind it.
According to Datta Godbole, a former research assistant at
California PATH, in Berkeley, the intent of the experiment is
to develop systems that allow cars to set up platoons of vehicles in an ad hoc fashion. The cars communicate with one
another by exchanging radio signals, much as portable electronic devices talk to each other using the Bluetooth wireless
protocol. When one car pulls up behind another, the two will

A typical automotive radar is roughly
the size of two stacked paperback
booksjust 14 by 7 by 10 cm

Meanwhile at Fujitsu Ten Ltd., Plymouth, Mich., engineers
are working toward another vision of the future of adaptive
cruise controlone targeted squarely at the realities of driving on often congested urban and suburban highways.
Fujitsu Ten has demonstrated a prototype system for socalled stop-and-go adaptive cruise control. Ordinary ACC
systems maintain safe distances between cars at speeds above
40 km/h, whereas Fujitsu Tens system will work primarily
at lower speeds in heavy traffic. If the car in front of it stops,
it will bring a vehicle to a complete stop. Afterward, it will not
re-engage the throttlethats up to the driverbut as soon
as the throttle is engaged, it will accelerate and decelerate

 September 2001

Though conventional ACC is still an expensive novelty, the next
generation, called cooperative adaptive cruise control, or CACC,
is already being tested in California and elsewhere. While ACC
can only respond to a difference between its own speed and the
speed of the car ahead, cooperative systems will allow two or
more cars to communicate and work together to avoid a collision. Ultimately, experimenters say, the technology may let
cars follow each other at intervals as short as a half second. At

Stop-and-go, automatically
IEEE SPECTRUM

Coming: cooperative collision avoidance

scan to determine whether the other is equipped for CACC.
The cars will then work out a safe following distance on the
basis of their actual performance characteristicsfor example,
the condition of the brakes of the trailing vehicle. It could be
that you end up having a Porsche or Mercedes limited by the
performance of a Pinto, Godbole acknowledged.
Researchers at the department of electrical engineering
and computer science at the University of California, Berkeley, are also working on a platooning architecture, but one in
which the following distance is a fixed 14 meters between
vehicles. The exact distance, determined by a set of control
laws, again depends on the state of the least-able vehicle.
Other teams are working on control laws to handle various
other situations, as, for example, when a car joins or leaves
the platoon, when a platoon member changes lanes or enters
or exits the freeway.

43

COVER STORY

along with the leading car over any range of speeds between
zero and the cruising speed set by the driver.
This so-called fusion sensor gets its name from the linking
of the enhanced millimeter-wave radar from Fujitsu Tens firstgeneration ACC system to a 640-by-480-pixel stereo camera
with a 40-degree viewing angle. The camera, which uses two
CMOS image sensors spaced 20 cm apart, is mounted inside
the car between the windshield and the rear-view mirror [see
illustration, p. 42].
The radar and the cameras work together to track the car
ahead and distinguish it from extraneous nonmoving objects
more rapidly than would be possible with either alone, accord-

ing to Keiji Fujimura, a senior manager at Fujitsu Ten. While
the radar homes in on the lead cars rear bumper, the stereo
camera is constantly measuring the widths of all the items in
its wide field of view [see figures opposite]. To calculate them,
it uses an algorithm based on the detection of vertical edges
and the distance. Bridges, trees, and other stationary objects
that are much wider or narrower than a car are quickly rejected
as reasons for the system to apply the brakes. The concentration on vertical edges also helped hold down the cost and
complexity of the optical system.
The cameras wide field, along with the radars widerthan-average 16-degree field of view, enhances the systems

Big Rigs Need Protection, Too
ollision avoidance is still largely

C

Fleet owners say that data collected

ders, and obstacles like divider strips and

futuristic in cars, but its been around

over hundreds of millions of kilometers of

bridge abutments are completely obscured.

for years on big rigs. Since 1994,

highway service with these systems sug-

A project at the Intelligent Transportation

Eaton Vorad Technologies LLC, Galesburg,

gests that they reduce accident rates by as

Systems Institute at the University of Min-

Mich., has equipped more than 10 000

much as 70 percent. Encouragingly, drivers

nesota has put sophisticated electronics in

trucks with collision-warning systems that

report that over time, they become condi-

the cab of a 30-ton prototype snowplow that

alert the driver when the vehicle ahead is

tioned to maintain greater following dis-

will warn the driver about nearby objects,

dangerously close.

tances. The US $2000$3000 cost of the

including cars. Advanced plows arent limit-

Its comforting news, especially if you do

ed to Minnesota, eitherWisconsin has eight

a lot of highway driving with trucks behind

and Iowa, 18.

you. After all, trucks take considerably

But four of Minnesotas $100 000 plows

longer than cars to stop. And when they

are in a class by themselves. They will each

crash, they can wreak far greater damage.

be studded with an additional $10 000 worth

For those and other reasons, the U.S.

of gadgets. Global positioning systems

National Transportation Safety Board last

(GPSs), radar, on-board databases, and

June asked the U.S. Depart-

heads-up displays will provide a virtual real-

ment of Transportation to de-

time image of the road, extending even to

velop performance standards

its unseen obstacles. GPS will locate

for collision-warning systems

the truck to within 25 meters, and a

on large trucks and to make

radar, tuned to a system mounted on a

them mandatory on all new com-

nearby transmission tower, will give a

mercial vehicles.
The rigs outfitted with the Eaton Vorad
system belong to 50 large fleets operated
by freight companies and large manufacturers. The unit, known as EVT-300, uses
radar to detect objects up to 107 meters
ahead, while other radars on both sides of

44

spots alongside the vehicle. A beeper and

accurate to within a few centimeters.
The display, reminiscent of a portable
videogame, uses the databases to provide
an image of road features such as turns,
intersections, and medians. Meanwhile, data
from vehicle-based radar shows nearby
objects as small rectangles on the screen.
We had 20 operators drive this truck

light-emitting diodes issue different warn-

units is quickly repaid by the savings from

with curtains on all the windows, said

ing levels based on the proximity of the

lower insurance premiums, fewer accidents

John Scharffbilig, highway maintenance

object in the trucks path.

and repairs, and even by lower fuel costs due

supervisor for the Minnesota Department of

Since 1998, Eaton Vorad has also

to changes in the drivers braking patterns.

Transportation, Saint Paul. They each drove

offered a radar-based adaptive cruise con-

Other work vehicles will also soon be

a four-mile course [6 km] with hairpin curves,

trol system as an option to the EVT-300.

benefiting from collision-avoidance. Con-

right-angle curves, and an S-curve, and

This add-on, called SmartCruise, maintains

sider snowplows: in the long, bitter winters of

we had only one small incident. Scharffbilig,

the interval between a truck and the vehicle

the north-midwestern United States, they

who was a snowplow driver for 22 years,

ahead by changing gears or by applying

must often slog through conditions in which

said, Its like going from a typewriter to

the brakes.

visibility is so bad that road markings, shoul-

a computer.

W. D. J.

EATON VORAD

IEEE SPECTRUM

 September 2001

the trucks cab pick up objects in the blind

reading on the plows position that is

Trucks equipped with the EVT-300
collision-warning system have sensors
on the bumper and below each door.
Displays warning the driver of frontal
and side collisions are inside the cab,
while the systems central processor
sits just above the engine block.

Following the Leader
The Fujitsu Ten system keeps a safe distance behind cars in its lane [reaction zone] by combining radar data on distance with stereo-camera
data on the size of objects. The camera derives the width of cars by detecting their edges [red dots, and yellow boxes in the photo]. Objects
that are too wide, like a bridge abutment, are ignored. The systems wide field of view allows it to continue tracking vehicles around curves.

Detected
vehicle edges

Detected
vehicle edges
Reaction
zone

view
Camera
w
R a d a r vie

Stereo-camera view

Like its competitors, Fujitsu Ten is hoping to grab a share of
a global market for first-generation ACC that is expected to
reach $2.4 billion by 2010. By 2006, collision avoidance will
be in 17 percent of new cars in Europe, 14 percent in AsiaPacific Rim, and 13 percent in North America, according to
Morris Kindig, president of Tier One.



 September 2001

performance on tight curves, enabling it to continue tracking
the lead car as the latter enters the curve and moves to one
side or the other. Fujitsu Ten plans to improve the unit with
a phased-array radar that scans by altering the relative
phase of the signals emitted from a group of antennas and,
consequently, the direction of the emitted beam. This beamshifting occurs almost instantaneously, because no component has to be physically moved. In a collision-avoidance
system, overall reaction time could be reduced. There are
other advantages; beam-shifting in a phased array is more
precise than scanning an antenna mechanically, and the unit
lasts longer because no movement means no wear. Better
still, the shape of the beam, which defines the scanning area,
can be changed on the fly in response to changing road conditions, said Fujimura.
The system has worked well in trials, Fujimura added;
nevertheless, it is not slated to go into production until 2004.

As collision avoidance becomes first commonplace and then
sophisticated, the role of the driver will change. Within a
decade or so, the drivers of the most advanced cars will only
have to steer. Eventually, people might not be entrusted even
with that task, at least on limited-access highways. In fact, a
decade ago engineers at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU),
in Pittsburgh, and in a Daimler-led research program called
Vision Technology Application (VITA) tested cars that largely
drove themselves. CMU and VITA vehicles logged thousands
of highway kilometers, most of them with a driver sitting
vigilantly behind the steering wheel but not touching it.
The Intelligent Vehicle Initiative in the United States and
the Ertico program in Europe are among dozens of groups
working on technologies that may ultimately lead to vehicles
that are wrapped in a cocoon of sensors, with a 360-degree
view of their environment. Nearby vehicles would be in constant communication and act cooperatively, enabling groups
of cars to race along like train cars, almost bumper to bumper,
at speeds above 100 km/h.
It will probably take decades, but car accidents may eventually become almost as rare as plane crashes are now. The
automobile, which transformed the developed world by offering mobility and autonomy, will finally stop exacting such an
enormous cost in human lives.

IEEE SPECTRUM

ILLUSTRATION: STEVE STANKIEWICZ
PHOTOGRAPH: MICHAEL R. VELLA

Robo-chauffeur?

45

