Neapolis University
HEPHAESTUS Repository

http://hephaestus.nup.ac.cy

School of Economic Sciences and Business

Articles

2017-01-11

The Forthcoming Artificial Intelligence
(AI) Revolution: Its Impact on Society
and Firms
Makridakis, Spyros
http://hdl.handle.net/11728/9254
Downloaded from HEPHAESTUS Repository, Neapolis University institutional repository

The Forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Revolution: Its Impact on Society and Firms
Spyros Makridakis
Rector of Neapolis University Pafos

The rise of powerful AI will be either the
best or the worst thing ever to happen
to humanity. We do not yet know which.
Stephen Hawking

Abstract
The impact of the industrial and digital (information) revolutions has, undoubtedly, been
substantial on practically all aspects of our society, life, firms and employment. Will the
forthcoming AI revolution produce similar, far-reaching effects? By examining analogous
inventions of the industrial, digital and AI revolutions, this article claims that the latter is on
target and that it would bring extensive changes that will also affect all aspects of our society
and life. In addition, its impact on firms and employment will be considerable, resulting in
richly interconnected organizations with decision making based on the analysis and
exploitation of big data and intensified, global competition among firms. People will be
capable of buying good and obtaining services from anywhere in the world using the Internet,
and exploiting the unlimited, additional benefits that will open through the widespread usage
of AI inventions. The paper concludes that significant competitive advantages will continue to
accrue to those utilizing the Internet widely and willing to take entrepreneurial risks in order
to turn innovative products/services into worldwide commercial success stories. The greatest
challenge facing societies and firms would be utilising the benefits of availing AI technologies,
providing vast opportunities for both new products/services and immense productivity
improvements while avoiding the dangers and disadvantages in terms of increased
unemployment and greater wealth inequalities.
KEYWORDS: Artificial Intelligence (AI); Industrial Revolution; Digital Revolution; AI
Revolution; Impact of AI Revolution; Benefits and Dangers of AI Technologies.

Over the past decade, numerous predictions have been made about the forthcoming
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Revolution and its impact on all aspects of our society, firms and
life in general. This paper considers such predictions and compares them to those of the
industrial and digital ones. A similar paper was written by this author and published in this
journal in 1995, envisioning the forthcoming changes being brought by the digital
(information) revolution, developing steadily at that time, and predicting its impact for the
year 2015 (Makridakis, 1995). The current paper evaluates these 1995 predictions and their
impact identifying hits and misses with the purpose of focusing on the new ones being
1

brought by the AI revolution. It must be emphasized that the stakes of rightly predicting the
impact of the AI revolution are far reaching as intelligent machines may become our final
invention that may end human supremacy (Barat, 2013). There is little doubt that AI holds
enormous potential as computers and robots will probably achieve, or come close to, human
intelligence over the next twenty years becoming a serious competitor to all the jobs
currently performed by humans and for the first time raising doubt over the end of human
supremacy.
This paper is organized into four parts. It first overviews the predictions made in the 1995
paper for the year 2015, identifying successes and failures and concluding that major
technological developments (notably the Internet and smartphones) were undervalued
while the general trend leading up to them was predicted correctly. Second, it investigates
existing and forthcoming technological advances in the field of AI and the ability of
computers/machines to acquire real intelligence. Moreover, it summarizes prevailing, major
views of how AI may revolutionize practically everything and its impact on the future of
humanity. The third section sums up the impact of the AI revolution and describes the four
major scenarios being advocated, as well as what could be done to avoid the possible
negative consequences of AI technologies. The fourth section discusses how firms will be
affected by these technologies that will transform the competitive landscape, how start-up
firms are founded and the way success could be achieved. Finally, there is a brief concluding
section speculating about the future of AI and its impact on our society, life, firms and
employment.
Table 1 summarizes the major inventions of the industrial, digital and AI revolutions. The
first two columns have been taken from the 1995 paper (Makridakis, 1995) replacing
Widespread use of with Actual use in 2015 while the third one is new referring to the AI
revolution and its existing and new, widespread used inventions by the year 2037. The
challenge is to correctly predict the impact of AI inventions and how the role of humans will
be affected when machines of equal, or superior intelligence could substitute, supplement
and/or amplify practically all mental tasks that until now have been the exclusive province of
humans. As with technological predictions made in the past, as well as those in the 1995
paper, it is necessary not to extrapolate in a linear fashion in order not to underestimate the
rate of technological change and its impact on all aspects of our society, life, work and firms.
In my opinion the forthcoming technologies of the AI revolution and their impact over the
next twenty years will probably be many times the magnitude of those of the digital one
from 1995 to 2015 and probably even greater than those of the Industrial revolution.

2

Table 1: From Steam Engines to Unattended Factories, from the ENIAC Computer to Big Data and
from Neural Net Devices to Self-Driving Cars and Singularity
______________________________________________________________________________________________________

Industrial Revolution

Digital Revolution

AI Revolution

(Mechanical power)

(Computer power)

(Brain power)

Substituting, supplementing and/or
amplifying routine manual tasks

Substituting, supplementing and/or
amplifying standardized mental tasks

Substituting, supplementing and/or
amplifying practically all mental tasks

1712 Newcomens steam engine
1784 Watts double action steam engine
1830 Electricity
1876 Ottos internal combustion engine
1890 Cars
1901 Electricity in homes
1914 Continuous production line

1946 ENIAC Computer
1950s IBMs business computers
1970s Electronic data processing (EDP)
1971 Time-sharing computers
1973 Microprocessor
1977 Apples computer
1980s Computers with modems

1919 Electricity in one-third of homes

1993 Personal computers in one-third of homes

1990 Neural net device reads handwritten digits
1993 Robot Polly navigates using vision
1997 Deep Blue defeats the world chess champion
1998 Robotic toy Furby learns how to speak
2005 Robot ASIMO serves restaurant customers
2009 Googles first self-driving car
2011 Watson computer beats Jeopardys
champions
2016 AlphaGo defeats GO champions using
neural learning algorithms

Actual use of:

Actual use in 2015:

Widespread use of:

1950s Electrical appliances
1960s Cars

2015 61% of people use smartphones
2015 Amazon most valuable US retailer
(Surpassing Walmart)
2015 23% of employees work from home
(Full-time or part-time)
2015 Collecting/Exploiting Big Data

202? Computer translations
202? Self-driving cars

1970s Long-distance telephones
2010 Unattended factories

3

202? Deep neural learning
203? Machines reach human intelligence

The 1995 Paper: Hits and Misses
The 1995 paper (Makridakis, 1995) was written at a time when the digital (at that time it
was called information) revolution was progressing at a steady rate. The paper predicted
that by 2015 the information revolution should be in full swing and that computers/
communications would be in widespread use, which has actually happened, although its
two most important inventions (the Internet and smartphones) and their significant
influence were not foreseen as such. Moreover, the paper predicted that a single computer
(but not a smartphone) can, in addition to its traditional tasks, also become a terminal
capable of being used interactively for the following: (p. 804-805)













Picturephone and teleconference
Television and videos
Music
Shopping
On line banking and financial services
Reservations
Medical advice
Access to all types of services
Video games
Other games (e.g., gambling, chess etc.)
News, sports and weather reports
Access to data banks

The above have all materialized and can indeed be accessed by computer, although the
extent of their utilization was underestimated as smartphones are now being used widely.
For instance, the ease of accessing and downloading scientific articles on ones computer in
his/her office or home would have seemed like science fiction back in 1995, when finding
such articles required spending many hours in the library (often in its basement for older
publications) and making photocopies to keep them for later use. Moreover, having access,
from ones smartphone or tablet, to news from anywhere in the world, being able to
subscribe to digital services, obtain weather forecasts, purchase games, watch movies, make
payments using smartphones and a plethora of other, useful applications was greatly
underestimated, while the extensive use of the cloud for storing large amounts of data for
free was not predicted at all at that time. Even in 1995 when the implications of Moores
law leading to increasing computer speed and storage while reducing costs were well
known, nevertheless, it was hard to imagine that in 2016 there would be 60 trillion web
pages, 2.5 billion smartphones, more than 2 billion personal computers and 3.5 billion
Google searches a day.
The paper correctly predicted as wireless telecommunications will be possible the above list
of capabilities can be accessed from anywhere in the world without the need for regular
telephone lines. What the 1995 paper missed, however, was that in 2015 top smartphones,
costing less than 500, would be as powerful as the 1995 supercomputer, allowing access to
the Internet and all tasks that were only performed by expensive computers at that time,
including an almost unlimited availability of new, powerful apps providing a large array of
innovative services that were not imagined twenty years ago. Furthermore, the paper
correctly predicted super automation leading to unattended factories stating that by 2015
4

there will be little need for people to do repetitive manual or mental tasks. It also foresaw
the decline of large industrial firms, increased global competition and the drop in the
percentage of labour force employed in agriculture and manufacturing (more on these
predictions in the section The Impact of the AI Revolution on Firms). It missed however the
widespread utilization of the Internet (at that time it was a text only service), as well as
search engines (notably Google), social networking sites (notably Facebook) and the
fundamental changes being brought by the widespread use of Apples iPhone, Samsungs
Galaxy and Googles Android smartphones. It is indeed surprising today to see groups of
people in a coffee shop or restaurant using their smartphones instead of speaking to each
other and young children as little as three or four years of age playing with phones and
tablets. Smartphones and tablets connected to the Internet through Wi-Fi have influenced
social interactions to a significant extent, as well as the way we search for information, use
maps and GPS for finding locations, as well as making payments. These technologies were
not predicted in the 1995 paper.

Towards the AI Revolution
The 1995 paper referred to Say, the famous French economist, who wrote in 1828 about the
possibility of cars as substitutes for horses:
Nevertheless no machine will ever be able to perform what even the worst horses can  the
service of carrying people and goods through the bustle and throng of a great city. (p. 800)

Say could have never dreamed of, in his wildest imagination, self-driving cars, pilotless
airplanes, Skype calls, super computers, smartphones or intelligent robots. Technologies
that seemed like pure science fiction less than 190 years ago are available today and some
like self-driving vehicles will in all likelihood be in widespread use within the next twenty
years. The challenge is to realistically predict forthcoming AI technologies without falling
into the same short-sighted trap of Say and others, including my 1995 paper, unable to
realize the momentous, non-linear advancements of new technologies. There are two
observations to be made.
First, 190 years is a brief period by historical standards and during this period we went from
horses being the major source of transportation to self-driving cars and from the abacus and
slide rules to powerful super computers in our pockets. Secondly, the length of time
between technological inventions and their practical, widespread use is constantly being
reduced. For instance, it took more than 200 years from the time Newcomen developed the
first workable steam engine in 1707 to when Henry Ford built a reliable and affordable car in
1908. It took more than 90 years between the time electricity was invented and its
extensive use by firms to substantially improve factory productivity. It took twenty years,
however, between ENIAC, the first computer, and IBMs 360 system that was mass
produced and was affordable by smaller business firms while it took only ten years between
the invention of the mobile phone in 1973 by Dr Martin Cooper and its public launch by
Motorola. The biggest and most rapid progress, however, took place with smartphones
which first appeared in 2002 and saw a stellar growth with the release of new versions
possessing substantial improvements every one or two years by the likes of Apple, Samsung
and several Chinese firms. Smartphones, in addition to their technical features, now
incorporate artificial intelligence characteristics that include understanding speech,
providing customized advice in spoken language, completing words when writing a text and
5

several other functions requiring embedded AI, provided by a pocket computer smaller in
size than a pack of cigarettes.
From smart machines to clever computers and to Artificial Intelligence (AI) programs: A
thermostat is a simple mechanical device exhibiting some primitive but extremely valuable
type of intelligence by keeping temperatures constant at some desired, pre-set level.
Computers are also clever as they can be instructed to make extremely complicated
decisions taking into account a large number of factors and selection criteria, but like
thermostats such decisions are pre-programmed and based on logic, if-then rules and
decision trees that produce the exact same results, as long as the input instructions are
alike. The major advantage of computers is their lightning speed that allows them to
perform billions of instructions per second. AI, on the other hand, goes a step further by not
simply applying pre-programmed decisions, but instead exhibiting some learning
capabilities.
The reading of handwritten digits (first utilized to determine the written amount on bank
checks) by the neural net device in 1990 (see Table 1) is a predecessor of efforts to achieve
learning. Handwritten digits could be inscribed in almost infinite ways so programming a
machine to correctly read them was no small challenge, beginning a new direction in
programming aimed at mimicking the human mind that can effortlessly understand all types
of handwritten digits. The same applies for Polly (see Table 1) that could learn to pronounce
a number of words, or ASIMO that could navigate in open places of constantly changing
environmental settings, rendering preprogramming impossible to account for all possible
cases. ASIMOs decisions were quite different than those of the extremely fast
supercomputer Deep Blue (see Table 1) that used brute force to identify and analyze up to
60 billion moves within the three minute period allowed to chess players to make their next
move. Deep Blue was incapable of learning as its programming was based on logic, if-then
rules and decision trees which meant that it could not learn and could make the same
mistakes over and over again.
The story of the Watson computer beating Jeopardys two most successful contestants is
more complicated, since retrieving the most appropriate answer out of the 200 million
pages of information stored in its memory is not a sign of real intelligence as it relied on its
lightning speed to retrieve information in seconds. What is more challenging according to
Jennings, one of Jeopardys previous champions, is to read clues in a natural language,
understand puns and the red herrings, to unpack just the meaning of the clue (May, 2013).
Similarly, it is a sign of intelligence to improve its performance by playing 100 games
against past winners. (Best, 2016). Watson went several steps beyond Deep Blue towards
AI by being able to understand spoken English and learn from his mistakes (New Yorker,
2016). However, he was still short of AlphaGo that defeated Go Champions in a game that
cannot be won simply by using brute force as the number of moves in this game is infinite,
requiring the program to use learning algorithms that can improve its performance as it
plays more and more games
Computers and real learning: According to its proponents, the main focus of AI research is
in teaching computers to think for themselves and improvise solutions to common problems
(Clark, 2015). But many doubt that computers can learn to think for themselves even though
6

they can display signs of intelligence. David Silver, an AI scientist working in DeepMind,
explained that even though AlphaGo has affectively rediscovered the most subtle concepts
of Go, its knowledge is implicit. The computer parse out these concepts  they simply emerge
from its statistical comparisons of types of winning board positions at GO (Chouard, 2016).
At the same time Cho Hyeyeon, one of the strongest Go players in Korea commented that
AlphaGo seems like it knows everything! while others believe that AlphaGo is likely to
start a new revolution in the way we play Go as it is seeking simply to maximize its
probability of reaching winning positions, rather than as human players tend to do 
maximize territorial gains (Chouard, 2016). Does it matter, as Silver said, that AlphaGos
knowledge of the game is implicit as long as it can beat the best players? A more serious
issue is whether or not AlphaGos ability to win games with fixed rules can extend to real life
settings where not only the rules are not fixed, but they can change with time, or from one
situation to another.
From digital computers to AI tools: The Intel Pentium microprocessor, introduced in 1993,
incorporated graphics and music capabilities and opened computers up to a large number of
affordable applications extending beyond just data processing. Such technologies signalled
the beginning of a new era that now includes intelligent personal assistants understanding
and answering natural languages, robots able to see and perform a
intelligent functions, self-driving vehicles and a host of other capabilities which were until
then an exclusive human ability. The tech optimists ascertain that in less than 25 years
computers went from just manipulating 0 and 1 digits, to utilizing sophisticated neural
network algorithms that enable vision and the understanding and speaking of natural
languages among others. Technology optimists therefore maintain there is little doubt that
in the next twenty years, accelerated AI technological progress will lead to a breakthrough,
based on deep learning that imitates the way young children learn, rather than the
laborious instructions by tailor-made programs aimed for specific applications and based on
logic, if-then rules and decision trees (Parloff, 2016).
For instance, DeepMind is based on a neural program utilizing deep learning that teaches
itself how to play dozens of Atari games, such as Breakout, as well or better than humans,
without specific instructions for doing so, but by playing thousands of games and improving
itself each time. This program, trained in a different way, became the AlphaGo that
defeated GO champion Lee Sodol in 2016. Moreover, it will form the core of a new project
to learn to play Starcraft, a complicated game based on both long term strategy as well as
quick tactical decisions to stay ahead of an opponent, which DeepMind plans to be its next
target for advancing deep learning (Kahn, 2016). Deep learning is an area that seems to be
at the forefront of research and funding efforts to improve AI, as its successes have sparked
a burst of activity in equity funding that reached an all-time high of more than $1 billion
with 121 projects for start-ups in the second quarter of 2016, compared to 21 in the
equivalent quarter of 2011 (Parloff, 2016).
Google had two deep learning projects underway in 2012. Today it is pursuing more than
1,000, according to their spokesperson, in all its major product sectors, including search,
Android, Gmail, translation, maps, YouTube, and self-driving cars (The Week, 2016).
IBMs Watson system used AI, but not deep learning, when it beat the
two Jeopardy champions in 2011. Now though, almost all of Watsons 30 component
7

services have been augmented by deep learning. Venture capitalists, who did not even
know what deep learning was five years ago, today are wary of start-ups that do not
incorporate it into their programs. We are now living in an age when it has become
mandatory for people building sophisticated software applications to avoid click through
menus by incorporating natural-language processing tapping deep learning (Parloff, 2016).
How far can deep learning go? There are no limits according to technology optimists for two
reasons. First as progress is available to practically everyone to utilize through Open Source
software, researchers will concentrate their efforts on new, more powerful algorithms
leading to cumulative learning. Second and equally important, in the future intelligent
computer programs will be capable of writing new programs themselves, initially perhaps
not so sophisticated ones, but improving with time as learning will be incorporated to be
part of their abilities. Kurzweil (Kurzweil, 2005) sees nonbiological intelligence to match the
range and subtlety of human intelligence within a quarter of a century and what he calls
Singularity to occur by 2045, bringing the dawning of a new civilization that will enable us
to transcend our biological limitations and amplify our creativity. In this new world, there
will be no clear distinction between human and machine, real reality and virtual reality.
For some people these predictions are startling, with far-fetched implications should they
come true. In the next section, four scenarios associated with the AI revolution are
presented and their impact on our societies, life work and firms is discussed.

The Four AI Scenarios
Until rather recently, famines, wars and pandemics were common, affecting sizable
segments of the population, causing misery and devastation as well as a large number of
deaths. The industrial revolution considerably increased the standards of living while the
digital one maintained such rise and also shifted employment patterns, resulting in more
interesting and comfortable office jobs. The AI revolution is promising even greater
improvements in productivity and further expansion in wealth. Today more and more
people, at least in developed countries, die from overeating rather than famine, commit
suicide instead of being killed by soldiers, terrorists and criminals combined and die from
old age rather than infectious disease (Harari, 2016). Table 1 shows the power of each
revolution with the industrial one aiming at routine manual tasks, the digital doing so to
routine mental ones and AI aiming at substituting, supplementing and/or amplifying
practically all tasks performed by humans. The critical question is: what will the role of
humans be at a time when computers and robots could perform as well or better and much
cheaper, practically all tasks that humans do at present? There are four scenarios
attempting to answer this question.
The Optimists: Kurzweil and other optimists predict a science fiction, utopian future with
Genetics, Nanotechnology and Robotics (GNR) revolutionizing everything, allowing humans
to harness the speed, memory capacities and knowledge sharing ability of computers and
our brain being directly connected to the cloud. Genetics would enable changing our genes
to avoid disease and slow down, or even reverse aging, thus extending our life span
considerably and perhaps eventually achieving immortality. Nanotechnology would enable
us to create virtually any physical product from information and inexpensive materials
bringing an unlimited creation of wealth. Finally, robots would be doing all the actual work,

8

leaving humans with the choice of spending their time performing activities of their choice
and working, when they want, at jobs that interest them.
The Pessimists: In a much quoted article from Wired magazine in 2000, Bill Joy (Joy, 2000)
wrote Our most powerful 21st-century technologies  robotics, genetic engineering, and
nanotech  are threatening to make humans an endangered species. Joy pointed out that
as machines become more and more intelligent and as societal problems become more and
more complex, people will let machines make all the important decisions for them as these
decisions will bring better results than those made by humans. This situation will,
eventually, result in machines being in effective control of all important decisions with
people dependent on them and afraid to make their own choices. Joy and many other
scientists (Cellan-Jones, 2016) and philosophers (Bostrom, 2014) believe that Kurzweil and
his supporters vastly underestimate the magnitude of the challenge and the potential
dangers which can arise from thinking machines and intelligent robots. They point out that
in the utopian world of abundance, where all work will be done by machines and robots,
humans may be reduced to second rate status (some saying the equivalent of computer
pets) as smarter than them computers and robots will be available in large numbers and
people will not be motivated to work, leaving computers/robots to be in charge of making
all important decisions. It may not be a bad world, but it will be a different one with people
delegated to second rate status.
Harari is the newest arrival to the ranks of pessimists. His recent book (Harari, 2016, p. 397)
concludes with the following three statements:
 Science is converging to an all-encompassing dogma, which says that organisms are
algorithms, and life is data processing
 Intelligence is decoupling from consciousness
 Non-conscious but highly intelligent algorithms may soon know us better than we
know ourselves
Consequently, he asks three key questions (which are actually answered by the above three
statements) with terrifying implications for the future of humanity:
 Are organisms really just algorithms, and is life just data processing
 What is more valuable  intelligence or consciousness?
 What will happen to society, politics and daily life when non-conscious but highly
intelligent algorithms know us better than we know ourselves?
Harari admits that nobody really knows how technology will evolve or what its impact will
be. Instead he discusses the implications of each of his three questions:
 If indeed organisms are algorithms then thinking machines utilizing more efficient
ones than those by humans will have an advantage. Moreover, if life is just data
processing then there is no way to compete with computers that can consult/exploit
practically all available information to base their decisions.
 The non-conscious algorithms Google search is based on the consultation of millions
of possible entries and often surprise us by their correct recommendations,. The
implications that similar, more advanced algorithms than those utilized by Google
search will be developed (bearing in mind Google search is less than twenty years
old) in the future and be able to access all available information from complete data
9



bases are far reaching and will provide us with better information than we could
expect to find ourselves.
Humans are proud of their consciousness, but does it matter that self-driving
vehicles do not have one, but still make better decisions than human drivers, as can
be confirmed by their significantly lower number of traffic accidents?

When AI technologies are further advanced and self-driving vehicles are in widespread use,
there will come a time that legislation will be passed forbidding human driving. Clearly, selfdriving vehicles do not exceed speed limits, do not drive under the influence of alcohol or
drugs, do not get tired, do not get distracted by talking on the phone or sending emails and
in general make fewer mistakes than human drivers, causing fewer accidents. There are two
implications if humans are not allowed to drive. First, there will be a huge labour
displacement for the 3.5 million unionized truck drivers in the USA and the 600 thousand
ones in the UK (plus the additional number of non-unionized ones) as well as the more than
one million taxi and Uber drivers in these two countries. Second, and more importantly, it
will take away our freedom of driving, admitting that computers are superior to us. Once
such an admission is accepted there will be no limits to letting computers also make a great
number of other decisions, like being in charge of nuclear plants, setting public policies or
deciding on optimal economic strategies as their biggest advantage is their objectivity and
their ability to make fewer mistakes than humans.
One can go as far as suggesting letting computers choose Presidents/Prime Ministers and
elected officials using objective criteria rather than having people voting emotionally and
believing the unrealistic promises that candidates make. Although such a suggestion will
never be accepted, at least not in the near future, it has its merits since people often choose
the wrong candidate and later regret their choice after finding out that pre-election
promises were not only broken, but they were even reversed. Critics say if computers do
eventually become in charge of making all important decisions there will be little left for
people to do as they will be demoted to simply observing the decisions made by computers,
the same way as being a passenger in a car driven by a computer, not allowed to take
control out of the fear of causing an accident. As mentioned before, this could lead to
humans eventually becoming computers pets.
The Pragmatists: At present the vast majority of views about the future implications of AI
are negative, concerned with its potential dystopian consequences (Elon Musk, the CEO of
Tesla, says it is like summoning the demon and calls the consequences worse than what
nuclear weapons can do). There are fewer optimists and only a couple of pragmatists like
Sam Altman and Michio Kaku (Peckham, 2016) who believe that AI technologies can be
controlled through OpenAI and effective regulation. The ranks of pragmatists also includes
John Markoff (Markoff, 2016) who pointed out that the AI field can be distinguished by two
categories: The first trying to duplicate human intelligence and the second to augment it by
expanding human abilities exploiting the power of computers in order to augment human
decision making. Pragmatists mention chess playing where the present world champion is
neither a human nor a computer but rather humans using laptop computers (Baraniuk,
2015). Their view is that we could learn to exploit the power of computers to augment our
own skills and stay always a step ahead of AI, or at least not be at a disadvantage. The
pragmatists also believe that in the worst of cases a chip can be placed in all thinking
10

machines/robots to render them inoperative in case of any danger. By concentrating
research efforts on intelligence augmentation, they claim we can avoid or minimize the
possible danger of AI while providing the means to stay ahead in the race against thinking
machines and smart robots.
The doubters: The doubters do not believe that AI is possible and that it will ever become a
threat to humanity. Dreyfus (1972), its major proponent, argues that human intelligence
and expertise cannot be replicated and captured in formal rules. He believes that AI is a fad
promoted by the computer industry. He points out to the many predictions that did not
materialize such as those made by Herbert A. Simon in 1958 that a computer would be the
worlds chess champion within ten years and those made in 1965 that machines will be
capable within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do (Crevier, 1993). Dreyfus
claims that Simons optimism was totally unwarranted as they were based on false
assumptions that human intelligence is based on an information processing viewpoint as
our mind is nothing like a computer. Although, the doubters criticisms may have been valid
in the last century, they cannot stand for the new developments in AI. Deep Blue became
the worlds chess champion in 1997 (missing Simons forecast by twenty one years) while
we are not far today from machines being capable of doing all the work that humans can do
(missing Creviers prediction by about a decade. There are also self-driving vehicles, nurserobots taking care of the elderly, and Google Search which may know better than us what
we are looking for. These technologies are hard to explain by those that doubt AI
technologies will materialize and affect us profoundly.
A more sophisticated attack comes from doubters who state that it is wrong to believe that
once computers have been provided with sufficiently advanced algorithms, they will be able
to improve and then replicate the way our mind works. According to them (Jankel, 2015)
computers will not be able to achieve the highest of human ability that of being creative as
doing so requires breaking the rules and being anti algorithmic. In other words creative
breakthroughs cannot be predicted so any algorithm developed by AI to do so will fail,
leaving a big vacuum to the sole province of the human mind that is will always stay more
valuable than all algorithmic AI technologies put together. It is like the paintings by the
masters which are by far superior to those of the millions of average painters put together.
This would mean that all tasks requiring creativity, including innovative breakthroughs,
strategic thinking, entrepreneurship, risk taking and similar ones would never, or at least not
in the foreseeable future, could be done algorithmically, providing humans with a clear
superiority versus intelligent machines.
The timing and expected impact of the AI Revolution: Kurzweil predicted that computers
will reach human intelligence around 2029 (Kurzweil, 2005) while Singularity will come by
2045. In 2009 Barrat and Goertzel (2011) asked the participants of an Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) Conference to answer the question: I believe that AGI (however I define
it) will be effectively implemented in the following timeframe. The answers of the 60
participants and the percentages of their answers are shown below:
Time Frame
Before 2030
2030  2049

Response
Percent
43.3%
25.0%

Response
Count
26
15
11

2050  2099
After 2100
Never

20.0%
10.0%
1.7%

12
6
1

With more than two thirds of respondents predicting that AGI will occur before 2050.
The second prediction being asked was: I believe that AGI (however I define it) will be a net
positive event for humankind. Among the 60 participants, 51, that is 85% answer Yes
while the remaining 15% said No.
In a similar survey Muller and Bostrom (2013) asked hundreds of AI experts at a series of
conference the following: For the purposes of this question, assume that human scientific
activity continues without major negative disruption. By what year would you see a (10% /
50% / 90%) probability for such High Level Machine Intelligence (HLMI) to exist?
The median answer for the 10% probability was 2022, the 50% probability was 2040 and the
90% probability the year 2075. The timing from the answers of the two surveys is not far
apart from those of Kurzweil (although they may have been influenced by them), agreeing
that AGI or HLMI are not so far off and with the majority of scientists believing that AI will
have a positive effect for humankind.
In a new survey conducted in early March 2016, Etzioni (2016) posed the following question:
In his book, Nick Bostrom has defined Superintelligence as an intellect that is much
smarter than the best human brains in practically every field, including scientific
creativity, general wisdom and social skills. When do you think we will achieve
Superintelligence?
The answers of the 80 responders (a 41% rate) are summarized below:
0%
In the next 10 years
7.5%
In the next 10-25 years
67.5%
In more than 25 years
25.0%
Never
These dates put the start of superintelligence later than that of Kurzweil or those of the
previous surveys but the answers refer to superintelligence rather than AI. It is also
interesting that only 25% of respondents answer never.

Firms and employment: From the Industrial and digital to the AI revolution
The industrial revolution brought far reaching changes to firms and employment while those
of the digital continued the decrease of employment in agriculture and manufacturing while
contributing to strong increases in services, in particular in computers, the Internet and the
mobile phone markets. The digital revolution also resulted in the decrease of the large
industrial firm. The expected changes being brought by AI technologies will be just as, or
even more significant as those of the Industrial revolution and much harder to predict for
two reasons. First, they will depend on the speed that AI technologies will succeed in
automating mental tasks currently performed by humans and replacing them in the process,
and secondly the extend of the accelerated process of technological change as intelligent
computer programs will become available and capable of developing new programs on their
own. There is no doubt, therefore, that AI technologies coupled with the exponential
12

growth of the Internet will affect how firms operate, how they sell their products/services as
well as how they are managed, influencing employment patterns.
In 1995 when the digital revolution was in its infancy, in a Newsweek article in February of
this year, Clifford Stoll wrote Baloney. Do our computer pundits lack all common sense? The
truth is no online database will replace your daily newspaper, no CD-ROM can take the place
of a competent teacher and no computer network will change the way government works
(Stoll, 1995). Yet, twenty years later most people access newspapers electronically, we have
Google search, Amazon is the 18th largest company in the Fortune 2016 list while Facebook
had more than 1.8 billion users at the end of 2016. The extent of change can be seen in
Table 2 that shows the ten largest firms in Fortune 500 list in 1995 and 2016. The
transformation is fundamental, demonstrating how the US economy went from the
industrial age to a varied structure of firms in retail, oil and gas, hi tech, finance and health
with the two largest industrial companies that were number one and two in 1995 to have
fallen to the eighth and ninth position in 2016. Moreover, we see Walmart, a traditional
retailer, at the top of the list which is interesting for two reasons. First, it confirms the shift
from the industrial to a consumer oriented era, and secondly it proves that a traditional,
brick-and-mortar firm can adapt to the digital revolution by successfully competing with
Amazon (Petro, 2016), one of the most successful digital firms, on both low prices as well as
superior customer service.
Table 2: Fortune 500: Lagest USA Firms in 1995 and 2016
1995
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
4
2
2
1
1

2016

GM
Industrial
Ford
Industrial
Exxon
Oil & Gas
Wal-Mart
Retail
AT&T
Telecom
GE
Industrial
IBM
Computer
Mobil
Oil & Gas
Sears Roebuck Retail
Altria
Industrial
Summary
Industrial
Oil & Gas
Retail
Telecom
Computer

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
1
1
1
3
2
1

Walmart
Retail
Exxon
Oil & Gas
Apple
Hi Tech
Berkshire
Finance
McKesson
Health
United Health Health
CVS Health
Health
GM
Industrial
Ford
Industrial
AT&T
Telecom
Summary
Retail
Oil & Gas
HI tech
Financial
Health
Industrial
Telecom

What is even more interesting than just largeness is the market capitalization of digital
versus traditional firms. Table 3 lists four digital firms and four traditional ones comparing
their market capitalization, revenues and number of employees. There are some important
differences between the two groups. The number of employees of digital firms is about 15%
of those of traditional ones while the market cap of the former is more than 67% that of the
latter, whereas the revenues of traditional firms is more than 218% that of digital ones.
Given the significantly lower number of employees, the higher market cap and the lower
13

revenues of digital firms, the market cap per employee of high tech firms is an astonishing
$4.13 million while their revenues per employee is $0.95 million versus $0.38 and $0.31
million respectively for traditional firms. There are probably several reasons for such large
differences, three major ones being great productivity improvements through the extensive
use of digital technologies including the Internet, continuous innovation of the
products/services being offered to consumers and of course, high expected growth rates in
their future revenues, skyrocketing their share price. For instance, Facebooks market cap
per employee of $22.1 million is more than nine times that of J&Js $2.43 million. But even
its revenues per employee of $1.15 million are more than ten times higher than that of J&J,
demonstrating the elevated productivity of Facebooks workforce.
Table 3: Market Capitalization and Revenues: Digital and Traditional Firms*

Market Cap:
Digital Firms

Revenues
per
Employee
(Million)

Market
Cap
(Billion)

Apple

115

617.5

5.37

233.7

2.03

Google

57

560.8

9.84

74.5

1.31

Amazon

270

365.9

1.36

107

0.40

Company

Market Cap:
Traditional Firms

Market Cap
per
Employee Revenues
(Million)
(Billion)

Number of
Employees
(000)

16

347.2

22.1

18

1.15

Total

458

1,891

4.13

433.2

0.95

Berkshire

331

407.2

1.23

210.8

0.64

J&J

127

308.9

2.43

15.4

0.12

2,200

214.6

0.10

482

0.22

Facebook

Walmart
Toyota

346

200.7

0.58

237

0.68

Total

3,004

1,131

0.38

945

0.31

*The information for these firms was collected on 12/12/2016

The four digital firms are at the forefront of AI, investing huge amounts of money for
internal AI research as well as buying promising start ups (CB Insights, 2016; Metz, 2016)
with the purpose of offering AI technologies to their customers as well as developing new
applications for the market place. Their huge market capitalization is a definite factor
allowing them to acquire whatever start up is considered valuable for them to stay ahead in
the AI race. The interesting question is if these four digital firms will remain at the top
twenty years from now when the AI revolution will be the dominant force determining
success and determining the high value added products and services.
The successful, dominant firm of the AI revolution and its management
Revolutions, by definition, are associated with major changes. The Industrial one brought
the large, industrial firm that exploited the power of machines to substitute, supplement
and amplify the manual work performed by humans, increasing productivity considerable
and offering affordable products to consumers, significantly increasing market size and
living standards. The digital revolution exploited the power of computers to substitute,
supplement and amplify the routine mental tasks performed by humans also improving
productivity and further contributing to reduced prices. As previously mentioned, the AI
revolution aims to substitute, supplement and amplify practically all tasks currently
performed by humans, becoming in effect, for the first time, a serious competitor to them.
14

Accepting this watershed reality, setting aside criticisms about AI similar to those levied in
1995 against the Internet (Stoll, 1995), and accepting our short-sightedness to predict bold
technological inventions, I will attempt, nevertheless, to predict the dominant firm twenty
years from now and the unavoidable shift in employment.
In 1995 from the four digital firms listed in Table 3 two (Google and Facebook) were not
even founded, Amazon was just a year old while Apple was nineteen years old but in a grave
financial state, with a profit of just $0.4 billion that year and a loss of $0.8 and $1 billion in
1996 and 1997. It was not possible, therefore, to have predicted in 1995 that the market
capitalization of these four firms would be (at the end of 2016) close to $1.9 trillion (more
than the GDP of the 120 poorest countries in the world) or that their market cap per
employee would be $4.13 million. Similarly, there is no accurate way to currently predict the
dominant, successful firms of 2037 or the critical factors leading to such success as it was
impossible to do so in 1995. Needless to say, we can consider these and extrapolate them
assuming that they may still hold true between now and 2037.
First and foremost all four firms have been extremely innovative, each one in its own unique
way. Second, they have all used the Internet in a super effective manner to provide their
services, sell their products and streamline their operations. Third, they have been
successful in hiring top talent and motivate their top employees with a pleasant work
environment, high salaries and generous stock options. Finally, these four firms have grown
significantly by acquiring other companies, often promising start-ups in the selective areas
they want to expand or attain expertise. Interestingly none of these four characteristics can
be automated, or become part of an algorithm, at least during the next twenty years. In my
view, they will continue to remain critical factors for succeeding in the future and will
depend greatly on peoples decisions and actions to implement them. Furthermore,
algorithms will have to be modified as competitive, market, environment and other factors
will be changing and only humans will be able to identify when such changes have occurred
(otherwise, the algorithms will be dysfunctional). Below each of these four success factors is
discussed in further detail.
Innovative breakthroughs: There are different types of innovation from minor, marginal
ones to distinctive breakthroughs as those implemented by the four digital firms of Table 3.
There are numerous books and articles written about innovative breakthroughs like the
iPhone, or Google search and how they have transformed the world and brought riches to
those that invented them. But what must be understood is that such breakthroughs are
exceptional and only identified as such after the fact. In an older but fascinating book about
breakthroughs (Ketteringham and Nayak, 1986), its authors concluded that there was one
common characteristic of all the sixteen cases they studied. Nobody believed that they
would be successful, urging their developers to give up wasting their time and company
resources. These breakthroughs succeeded only because of the persistence of their
inventors that did not give up despite all hardship and continued their development often in
their spare time. The value of breakthroughs is hard to appreciate as they involve brand new
applications people are not familiar with, the value of which they cannot understand, or do
not believe as technically possible as was the case with fibre optics. Even the value of
Google search was not apparent in the late 1990s as can be attested by the fact that its
inventors could not sell it for the asking price of 1.6 billion (Battelle, 2005).
15

It cannot be assured that by identifying interesting innovative ideas they will turn into
commercially successful applications. The road is long and full of risks as many things can go
wrong, including technological problems, inability to ensure adequate financing,
competitors developing similar ideas and possible delays until people realize their
importance and decide to use them. Moreover, it is worth mentioning that the great
majority of innovative ideas do not succeed in a big way, that new competitors can improve
the original idea and capture market shares and that many inventions can become obsolete
by more novel ones often introduced by garage start-ups (see below). Creative destruction
is at the heart of market economies and the major contributor to productivity increases as
well as the offering of a greater choice of product/services to consumers. No concrete
advice on how to innovate, not to mention achieve breakthroughs, can be provided beyond
saying that some organizations are better than others, at least for some period of time, in
creating the right environment to cultivate innovation and exploit its benefits. It must be
emphasized, therefore, that success is unpredictable and that the more valuable the
innovative idea the harder it is to conceive and implement.
Technologies and their Usage: The digital revolution has provided significant productivity
improvements for the back office operations of firms and allowed consumers to buy goods
and services online without having to physically go to a store or office. In the process it has
eliminated a large number of repetitive mental tasks performed by people and shifted
employment patterns. This is evident in Table 3 by comparing the number of employees
between digital and traditional firms. For instance, the number of employees of Walmart is
more than eight times higher than that of the other retailer Amazon, while the revenues of
the former is only 4.5 higher than the latter, showing the great productivity improvements
being realized by Amazons effective utilization of digital technologies, and the Internet. It is
likely that the AI revolution will continue or even accelerate that pattern, further improving
productivity and reducing employment with some firms being more successful than others
by exploiting emerging technologies and investing considerable sums to do so.
The uniqueness of the AI technologies is their potential to supplement, substitute and
amplify practically all tasks currently performed by humans with critical consequences for
firms that must achieve significant productivity improvements to stay competitive, but at
the same time raising the possibility of increased unemployment (see below). Extrapolating
from the impact of the Industrial and digital revolutions it seems that technology has
created more jobs than it has destroyed (Stewart, Debapratim and Cole, 2015) although
there may be a transitional period of increased unemployment until new opportunities are
created to serve the emerging needs of those with increased incomes. The difficulty would
be in knowing which of the AI technologies would provide the greatest benefits and
determining the right time to start investing in them. It is doubtful that such an investment
decision could be made algorithmically as it would require predictions about the pros and
cons of future and uncertain technologies. This means that top executives will have to
consider the advantages and drawbacks of the available investment possibilities and make
the final decision(s) judgmentally using all information at hand.
Managing people: It is also highly likely that the trend towards a smaller payroll will
continue as AI technologies will accelerate the number of tasks that can be performed by
16

machines and robots. The more jobs being automated however, the greater the skills that
would be required to adequately perform the remaining tasks, for both the efficient
operation of firms as well as for utilizing AI and other technologies in the best possible way.
This would require hiring talented employees and motivating them to get the most out of
their performance in order to attain and maintain competitive advantages over other firms.
The major differentiator would therefore come from these talented individuals conceiving
and implementing innovative ideas and winning strategies that would steer the organization
onto a successful path. Hiring, motivating and successfully managing talented individuals
would probably be one of the most critical success factors for firms in the AI era and would
also be impossible to put into an algorithm.
Growth by acquisition: The four digital firms of Table 3 have grown substantially through
acquisitions which also allowed them to obtain and secure desired expertise in vital areas.
Together they have acquired more than 400 firms (Whittick, 2016) with Google leading the
way with 190, Apple with 82, Amazon with 67 and Facebook with 62 (including WhatsApp
bought for $19 billion, a huge price for a start up with only 55 employees and less than five
years old). In the past, new technological inventions have fundamentally affected the
revenues and profitability of firms and have become a critical success factor. It is
exceedingly likely that this pattern will continue, if not accelerate with AI technologies
creating uncertainty for established firms as such technologies, or who will introduce them
first cannot be predicted. The huge market capitalization of the four firms of Table 3 makes
it easier for them to acquire start-ups which they believe will be strategically important for
their future expansion through the issuing of more shares if necessary. In the process they
can maintain and/or increase their monopolistic/oligopolistic advantages while also
squashing possible, future competition. It is interesting to consider the implications if this
trend continues in the future and what it will mean for competition as it can create a
winner takes all environment favouring todays dominant firms.
Competitive Requirements: Big Data, Algorithmic Decisions and Operational Excellence
Let us assume that an advanced algorithm is developed to predict exactly what customers
want. What will the result be? Even if it is proprietary, competitors will inevitably figure out
how it works and also utilize its predictions after some period of time. If it is available to
everyone at a price, all competitors will swiftly adopt this algorithm to stay competitive.
Those who do not utilize it will probably go out of business given its superiority to predict
customers wants. There will be no special benefit as the advanced algorithm would simply
become a competitive requirement for staying in the race. Big data (Schonberger and
Murray, 2014) offers the opportunity of developing successful algorithms to understand
what customers want and as such can be extremely useful for decision makers. The
challenge is that both the data and the techniques to analyse them are available to
practically everyone interested, turning their recommendations into a competitive
requirement. Jankel (2015) is therefore probably right, stating that computers will never
create disruptive innovations as well as be able to provide advice on the other three major
factors (selecting the right technologies, managing people and making the appropriate
acquisitions) characterizing the four digital firms of Table 3.
The 2037 Successful Firm

17

The successful 2037 AI era firms cannot be predicted but they will probably be closer to the
digital than the traditional ones of Table 3. They will exploit global opportunities to the limit
in order to design, produce and sell their products/services and they must be willing to
assume entrepreneurial risks to innovate and grow. The speed of technological change from
the forthcoming AI revolution will open huge opportunities for growth and profitability but
also new challenges and competition from new garage type start-ups as breakthrough ideas
can come from anywhere and their development and financing will be easier through crowd
sourcing and venture capital. Only time will tell if the successful firms of the digital
revolution (as the four listed in Table 3) will still be dominant in 2037 or if they will be
replaced by new ones. In my opinion, there are accrued competitive advantages that could
be exploited to stay at the top, but at the same time big technological breakthroughs can
fundamentally change the competitive landscape and wipe out such advantages. But what is
probable is that AI will bring revolutionary changes to the business environment and the
way firms are inspired, founded and managed at a much greater scale than the digital era.
The successful firms during the AI revolution will have in addition to the Chief Innovation
Officer (CIO) to also appoint a Chief Artificial Intelligence Officer (CAIO) to be in charge of
evaluating and exploiting AI technologies to gain the most out of their implementation in all
aspects of the firm.
Garage start-ups, crowd sourcing and VC Funding
The way the four digital firms of Table 3 were created was quite different than that of
traditional ones. They were conceived with a vision to change the world, even though
making money was no doubt also part of their founders objective. Financing was secured
mainly through Venture Capital (VC) (with the exception of Apple that was founded well
before VC funding was readily available) that invested heavily in these firms that managed
to grow rapidly over time (more than 20% a year) and achieve stellar market capitalization
putting all four of them at the top ten in the USA. This is quite different to that of traditional
firms that depend heavily on the personal financing of their owners, supplemented with
bank loans, and apart from a few exceptions, experience low growth rates, taking decades
to reach the top.
The widespread utilization of the Internet has provided two significant tools for start-ups
that can utilize crowd funding and crowd creativity to improve their chances of success.
Such tools coupled with VC funding will increase the number of new firms aimed at
exploiting AI technologies and the chance to succeed in big ways like Google, Amazon or
Facebook. Breakthrough ideas can come from anywhere and they do not require expensive
laboratories or huge financing to develop and market. This means that garage operations,
small offices in incubators or accelerators, as well as cubicles in universities, can provide an
initial base for start-ups that can emerge everywhere outside Silicon Valley as their value in
wealth creation is becoming obvious. Today a large number of countries and individuals
understand the importance of innovation and entrepreneurship for their economies and
encourage their youth to implement their innovative ideas by starting their own business.
Israel has been extremely successful in doing so (Senor and Singer, 2009) as has China,
Germany, UK, France, Chile and New Zealand among others. Characteristic of efforts to
encourage and expand start-ups is Frances latest mega-35,000 m2 campus being built in
Paris to house start-ups under one roof, or the vision of Chineses President Xi Jinping to
turn his country into a global technology powerhouse. The implications of these efforts will
18

be the globalization and acceleration of technological innovation, greater competition and
more equal distribution of employment and wealth across nations that encourage
technological innovation.
Employment patterns
The 1995 paper showed the continuous decline in the agricultural and manufacturing (since
it peaked in the 1950s) employment and the growth in that of services. Table 4 and 5
indicate that the same pattern has continued since 1995 with employment dropping from
2.5% to 0.7% in agriculture and from 17% to 14% in manufacturing in the USA and
correspondingly from 2.1% to 1.3% and from 21% to 15% in the UK while witnessing
increases in the percentage of employment in services. If current trends continue
agriculture and manufacturing employment will further decrease as AI automation will
affect both agricultural and manufacturing operations and jobs. This means that
employment in services will have to broaden to compensate for the jobs being lost in
agriculture and manufacturing. However, the service sector will also witness considerable
realignments as many jobs will be eliminated and new ones will be created.

100%

Table 4: USA: % OF LABOR FORCE IN AGRICULTURE, MANUFACTURING AND SERVICES

75%

SERVICES
50%

AGRICULTURE

25%

MANUFACTURING
0%

1820 30

40

50

60

70

80

90 1900 10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

87

95 2014

Table 5: UK: % of Labor Force in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services

100%

Services

75%

50%

Manufacturing
25%

Agriculture
0%
1801

21

41

61

81

1901

19

21

41

61

81

91 2001 14

What critics fear is the speed of job obsolescence through AI technologies in particular in
the service sector. They say that while it took more than two centuries to witness the full
impact of the Industrial revolution and three or four decades to experience that of the
digital one, it may be no more than a decade until we observe the full effects of the AI
revolution (The New Yorker, 2016). Another concern is the extent of displaced jobs that
some studies (Frey and Osborne, 2013) estimate as 47% of all occupations. What experts are
afraid of is whether the social structure could withstand such a fast and huge reduction in
jobs. They claim that even if there were vast retraining programs it may not be easy to avoid
societal disruptions as the new jobs would require skills that may not be so easily attainable.
In addition to the truck and taxi drivers already mentioned that could be replaced by selfdriving vehicles, there are many other jobs at stake. According to PBS (Thoet, 2016) the
newly announced Amazon Go retail store, using AI technologies to abolish employees,
could drastically change the way people shop and eventually eliminate the need for millions
of workers, industry experts predict. Other jobs that could be affected range from preparing
and taking payments for fast food to skilled professions including financial advisers, medical
specialists as well as high level IT tasks that could be automated using algorithms such as
those available through Amazons Web Services. The big question is where will all these lead
and what will the implications be for employment and wealth distribution?
A recent McKinsey study entitled Where machines could replace humans  and where they
cant (yet) (Chui, Manyika and Miremadi, 2016) distinguishes three groups of occupational
activities that are highly susceptible, less susceptible and least susceptible to machines and
robots taking over jobs currently performed by humans (with the number in parentheses
denoting the estimated percentage substitution). The first group includes managing
others (9%) and applying expertise (18%), the second covers interactions among
stakeholders (20%) and unpredictable physical work (25%) while the third contains data
collection (64%), data processing (69%) and predictable physical work (78%). The
above classification is consistent with other studies which found that jobs related to social
skills grew 10% a year between 1980 and 2012 while all others declined by 3% during the
same period (Deming, 2016). However, will the new jobs being created compensate for, or
even augment those lost by technology as in the past? Opinions differ greatly on this issue
as some are arguing that there is a fixed supply of work to be done, while others, with
Milton Friedman the most notable advocate, claims that human wants and needs are
infinite and that clever entrepreneurs will always devise ways to fulfil them as long as
sufficient buying power is available. Others worry, however, saying what if the jobs of the
future are also potentially automatable? (The New Yorker, 2016).
In an article entitled Will Humans Go the Way of Horses? Labour in the Second Machine
Age (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2015) its authors consider both sides of the argument and
conclude that there are no obvious answers. Instead they propose:
Its time to start discussing what kind of society we should construct around a laborlight economy. How should the abundance of such an economy be shared? How can
the tendency of modern capitalism to produce high levels of inequality be muted while
preserving its ability to allocate resources efficiently and reward initiative and effort?

20

What do fulfilling lives and healthy communities look like when they no longer center
on industrial-era conceptions of work?
The critics claim that even if technological automation may not increase unemployment, it
can destroy middle range jobs while increasing those on the low and high ends, augmenting
social inequality as the pay between low and high end jobs is amplified. Governments must,
therefore, enact policies to minimize such inequalities either by guaranteeing a minimum
universal income, raising taxes for the superrich and/or increasing inheritance taxes. During
the digital revolution the demand for computer and data specialists rose steeply their
salaries while eliminating large numbers of clerical jobs. The prediction is that the same
thing is happening for AI specialties, such as deep learning professionals, necessary for the
further development of AI technologies (Metz, 2016). In all likelihood such demand will
further intensify until more people are educated to be able to fill these jobs.
In addition to specialized AI professions, employment opportunities will exist by moving
from traditional jobs susceptive to automation, to those demanding social and interpersonal
skills as well as creativity and innovation. There will also be a demand for novel jobs that will
aim to satisfy the needs of higher income people that can afford personal trainers, coaches,
beauty advisors, diet consultants, nutritionists and teachers for their children, among
others. These and similar jobs will offer employment opportunities and adequate payment,
and will compensate for those lost when AI technologies will replace existing jobs.
Finally, the impact of the AI revolution will probably be more pronounced in developing
countries than in advanced ones for two reasons. First, as unskilled and semiskilled labour
will be replaced by computers and robots there will be no reason for firms to move their
production to developing nations to exploit their cheap supply of labour as they can achieve
the same or cheaper costs utilizing AI technologies, thus increasing the trend towards
reshoring back to advanced countries (Ford, 2016). Second, developing countries will be at
a disadvantage by not being able to invest in expensive AI technologies, particularly since
such technologies will reduce the demand for human labour thus further increasing
unemployment. Unfortunately, there will be no easy solutions, with the greatest challenge
being how to educate their young people in AI technologies and by doing so become able to
attract investments from abroad. Otherwise, they will stay behind as the nations that did
not manage to industrialize their economies.
Work and Leisure
Machines, electrification, cars, computers, the Internet and smartphones among others
inventions have affected our lives and shaped our work and social environment. The impact
of AI technologies can be even more profound than that of both the Industrial and digital
revolutions put together, as it holds the potential to affect practically all tasks currently
performed by humans, diminishing the amount of work left for people and increasing
wealth inequalities and their free time. Proponents of the AI technologies see this as a
positive development liberating people from routine work, allowing them to pursue their
own interests. The critics say that this will further increase inequalities as fewer people will
hold the well-paying jobs and the majority will depend on part time work or limited
employment opportunities and therefore receive a lower income. There are no obvious
answers to this argument and it will all depend as Brynjolfsson and McAfee say what kind
21

of society we should construct around a labor-light economy? How should the abundance of
such an economy be shared? At the beginning of the Industrial revolution people used to
work fifteen hours a day, five days a week. Today a standard work week is less than half and
there is no reason that it cannot be halved in the future as productivity increases.
Aristocrats did not work at all in the past, devoting all their time to leisurely activities,
hobbies, holidays and travel and things they were interested in. The citizens of ancient
Athens spent practically all their time philosophising, exercising and concerned with
democracy, while slaves did all the work. The optimists dream is that we can all become the
new aristocrats, or the modern Athenians, with computers and robots as our slaves
doing all the housework, the shopping and working at the office, the factory or land.
Whether this dream is a utopian or dystopian future is left up to the reader to decide, not
underestimating however, that intelligent machines will eventually become at least as smart
as us and a serious competitor to the human race if left unchecked and if their great
potential to augment our own abilities is not exploited to the maximum.

Conclusions
The societal impact of the digital revolution has been significant as it has affected most
aspects of our lives and work, having molded the dominant firm, shaped our shopping and
entertainment habits as well as our employment patterns. This paper argues that the AI
revolution is on target and will come into full force within the next twenty years as did the
digital one since 1995 and will probably have an even greater impact than both the
Industrial and digital ones combined. What is uncertain is if such an impact will lead to a
utopian or dystopian future, or somewhere in between, which according to the optimists
will happen when some mutually beneficial coexistence is achieved by accepting our
limitations and seeking ways to augment our own decision making abilities in a similar way
that the world chess champion is now a human utilizing the help of a computer to
determine his moves. The pessimists worry that when AI machines become smarter than us
they will be making all our decisions for us, from the less important ones like SIRI or Cortana
choosing a restaurant and ordering food and wine for their owners, to important ones like
driving cars or managing nuclear plants. Pessimists are also concerned with social discontent
as the amount of work available for people will diminish, and with the increasing wealth
inequality between those employed or owning AI applications and the rest.
This paper has described the substantial uncertainty about the future impact of AI
technologies and their potential to create a utopian or dystopian world. As we head towards
unchartered waters and uncertain choices the obvious challenge is what can be done to
maximize the chances of exploiting the benefits while avoiding the negative consequences
of AI technologies? There are two positive aspects in dealing with this challenge. First, the
dangers are well understood and secondly, there is plenty of time to debate the issues and
take wise actions to deal with them effectively. Increased unemployment and greater
wealth inequality are debatable given that the Industrial and digital revolutions decreased
rather than increased unemployment (Stewart, Debapratim and Cole, 2015), although some
claim that this may change drastically with the widespread introduction of AI technologies
leading to massive job reductions and bringing us towards uxleys Brave New World.
Scientists like Etzioni (2016), however, do not believe that AI is a threat to humanity,
maintaining that it would be a great pity to forfeit its great advantages out of
22

unsubstantiated fears that it may get out of control. There is little doubt that new
technological breakthroughs similar to those of the Internet and smartphones of the digital
revolution will probably emerge during the next twenty years and that will greatly impact
our societies, lives and work in general. The challenge will be to identify such breakthroughs
as early as possible in order to exploit their benefits.
Concerns about the AI related risks are not unique. Possible catastrophes, in particular those
that threaten to destroy the environment or end human civilization attract peoples
attention and are popular among both scientists seeking to publicize their work and
journalists looking for cool stories. Nuclear wars, global warming, accidents in nuclear
plants, unchecked epidemics, and geoengineering, among others, worry people who are
concerned about their implications. At the same time it is clear that AI risks cannot be
ignored even though the probability of their occurrence may be extremely small as their
potential impact, according to critics, can be devastating, ending human supremacy when
machines smarter than people are developed. At the same time progress cannot be halted
which means that the only rational alternative is to identify the risks involved and devise
effective actions to avoid their negative consequences. In ending this paper I would like to
quote Faggella (2016) saying: Thinking about the risks associated with emerging AI
technology is hard work, engineering potential solutions and safeguards is harder work, and
collaborating globally on implementation and monitoring of initiatives is the hardest work of
all. But considering all thats at stake, I would place all my bets on the table and argue that
the effort is worth the risk many times over.

23

REFERENCES
Baraniuk, C. (2015). The Cyborg Chess Players that Cannot Be Beaten, BBC News
http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20151201-the-cyborg-chess-players-that-cant-be-beaten
Barrat, J., (2013). Our Final Invention: Artificial Intelligence and the End of the Human Era,
Thomas Dunne Books
Barrat, J. and Goertzel, B. (2011). How Long Till AGI?  Views of AGI-11 Conference
Participants, HPlusMagazine.com
http://hplusmagazine.com/2011/09/16/how-long-till-agi-views-of-agi-11-conferenceparticipants/
Battelle, J. (2005). The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and
Transformed Our Culture, New York, NY: Penguin
Best, J. (2016). IBM Watson: The inside story of how the Jeopardy-winning supercomputer
was born, and what it wants to do next, TechRepublic.Com
http://www.techrepublic.com/article/ibm-watson-the-inside-story-of-how-the-jeopardywinning-supercomputer-was-born-and-what-it-wants-to-do-next/
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies, Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Brynjolfsson, E. and McAfee, A. (2015). Will Humans Go the Way of Horses?, Foreign Affairs
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-06-16/will-humans-go-way-horses
CBInsights.Com (2016). The Race for AI: Google, Twitter, Intel, Apple in A Rush to Grab
Artificial Intelligence Startups
https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/top-acquirers-ai-startups-ma-timeline/
Chouard, T. (2016). The Go Files: AI computer clinches victory against Go champion,
Nature.Com
http://www.nature.com/news/the-go-files-ai-computer-clinches-victory-against-gochampion-1.19553
Chui, M., et al. (2016). Where machines could replace humans  and where they cant (yet),
McKinsey.Com
http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/wheremachines-could-replace-humans-and-where-they-cant-yet
Clark, J. (2015). Why 2015 Was a Breakthrough Year in Artificial Intelligence,
Bloomberg.Com
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-08/why-2015-was-a-breakthroughyear-in-artificial-intelligence

24

Crevier, D. (1993). AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search for Artificial Intelligence, Basic
Books
Deming, D.J. (2016). The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market, NBER
working paper series
Dreyfus, H. L. (1972). What Computers still cant do: A Critique of Artificial Reason, MIT Press
Etzioni, O. (2016). No, the Experts Dont Think Superintelligent AI is a Threat to Humanity,
MIT Technology Review
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/602410/no-the-experts-dont-think-superintelligentai-is-a-threat-to-humanity/
Faggella, D. (2016). Exploring the risks of artificial intelligence, Mar 21, Crunch Network
NETWORK
https://techcrunch.com/2016/03/21/exploring-the-risks-of-artificial-intelligence/
Ford, M. (2016). Rise of Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future, Basic Books,
New York
Frey, C. B. and Osborne, M. A. (2013). The Future of Employment: How Susceptible are Jobs
to Computerisation?, Oxford Martin School
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf
Harari, Y. N. (2016). Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow, Harvill Secker, New York
Cellan-Jones, R. (2014) Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end humanity
BBC News
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540
Jankel, N. S. (2015). AI vs. Human Intelligence: Why Computers Will Never Create Disruptive
Innovations, Huffington Post
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nick-seneca-jankel/ai-vs-human-intelligence_b_6741814.html
Joy, B. (2000). Why The Future Doesnt Need Us, Wired.Com
https://www.wired.com/2000/04/joy-2/
Kahn, J. (2016). Googles DeepMind AI Takes on Popular Video Game Starcraft,
Bloomberg.Com
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-04/deepmind-master-of-go-takes-onpopular-video-game-starcraft
Ketteringham, J. M. and Nayak, P. R. (1986). How the Vision and Drive of Innovators in
Sixteen Companies Created Commercial Breakthroughs that Swept the World, Rawson
Association

25

Kurzweil, R. (2005). The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology, Viking Press
Makridakis, S. (1995). The Forthcoming Information Revolution: Its Impact on society and
firms, Futures, Vol. 27, No. 8, pp. 799  821
Markoff, J. (2016). Machines of Loving Grace: The Quest for Common Grounds Between
Humans and Robots, Harper Collins, New York
May, K. T. (2013). How did supercomputer Watson beat Jeopardy champion Ken Jennings?
Experts discuss, TedBlog http://blog.ted.com/how-did-supercomputer-watson-beatjeopardy-champion-ken-jennings-experts-discuss/
Metz, C. (2016). Google, Facebook and Microsoft are remaking themselves around AI,
Wired.Com https://www.wired.com/2016/11/google-facebook-microsoft-remaking-aroundai/
Muller, V. C. and Bostrom, N. (2013). Future Progress in Artificial Intelligence: A Survey of
Expert Opinion, Fundamental Issues of Artificial Intelligence, Synthese Library, Berlin:
Springer
New Yorker (2016). Our Automated Future: How long will it be before you lose your job to a
robot? December 19 & 26, 2016
Parloff, R. (2016). Why Deep Learning is Suddenly Changing Your Life, Fortune
http://fortune.com/ai-artificial-intelligence-deep-machine-learning/
Peckham, M. (2016). What 7 of the Worlds Smartest People Think About Artificial
Intelligence, Time.Com
http://time.com/4278790/smart-people-ai/
Petro, G. (2016). Amazon Vs. Walmart: Clash of the Titans. Forbes.Com
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gregpetro/2016/08/25/amazon-vs-walmart-clash-of-thetitans/#2f18402d18d9
Say, J. B. (1828). Cours complet deconomie politique, Chez Rapilly, Paris.
Senor, D. and Singer, S. (2009). Start-up Nation, Hachette Book Group
Schonberger, V.M. and Cukier, K. (2014). Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How
We Live, Work, and Think, John Murray, London
Stewart, I., Debapratim, D. and Cole, A. (2015). Deloitte
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/finance/deloitte-uk-technologyand-people.pdf

Stoll, C. (1995).  Why the Web wont Be Nirvana, Newsweek
http://europe.newsweek.com/clifford-stoll-why-web-wont-be-nirvana-185306?rm=eu
26

TheWeek.Com, (2016). Google has more than 1,000 artificial intelligence projects in the
works. http://theweek.com/speedreads/654463/google-more-than-1000-artificial-intelligenceprojects-works

Thoet, A. (2016). What Amazons cashier-free store could mean for millions of workers,
PBS.Org
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/amazons-cashier-free-store-mean-millionsworkers/
Whittick, S. (2016). We visualized acquisitions by the Big Five tech companies since 1985,
heres what we learned, Geckoboard
https://www.geckoboard.com/blog/acquisitions-mergers-big-five-techcompanies/#.WFkFPVN96M9

27

