What Big Data Tell Us About Trees
and the Sky in the Cities
Fbio Duarte(&) and Carlo Ratti
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
{fduarte,ratti}@mit.edu

Since Google Street View (GSV) was launched in 2007, its cars have been collecting
millions of photographs in hundreds of cities around the world. In New York City alone,
there are about 100,000 sampling points, with six photographs captured in each of them,
totaling 600,000 images. In London, this number reaches 1 million images. The GSV fleet
now also includes bicycles, trolleys (for indoor spaces), snowmobiles, and trekkers (for
areas inaccessible by other modes). Using the images to fly over the Grand Canyon, visit
historic landmarks in Egypt, discover national parks in Uganda, or circulate through the
streets of Moscow, although great experiences, explore only the most immediate and visual
aspects of the images. Such an overwhelming abundance of images becomes much more
interesting when we consider them as a rich source of urban information.
Researchers in the elds of computer sciences and articial intelligence have been
applying computer vision and machine learning techniques to interpret GSV images.
Very few of them move beyond the technical aspects of deciphering these images to
explore novel ways to understand the urban environment. The few examples include
the detection and counting of pedestrians (Yin et al. 2015) or the inferring of landmarks
in cities (Lander et al. 2017). Still, most of this research is either based on small subsets
of GSV data or presents a combination of techniques in which the participation of
humans is required:

Fig. 1 Computer vision process

At the Senseable City Lab, we have been using computer vision and machine
learning techniques to analyze full datasets of GSV images in order to understand urban
features in ways that would take too long or be nancially prohibitive for most cities
using human-based or other technological methods. We started by looking at the trees
and to the sky. Exposure to greenery and natural light is essential to human well-being,

 Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
K. De Rycke et al., Humanizing Digital Reality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6611-5_6

60

F. Duarte and C. Ratti

outdoor comfort, and climate mitigation. Therefore, quantifying green areas and light
exposure in different parts of the city will inform better urban design as well as
environmental and public health policies. By using GSV data with computer vision
techniques, we demonstrate the value of bringing big data to the human level, to the
tangible aspects of urban life.
Usually, street trees are quantied and characterized using eld surveys or other
technologies such as high spatial resolution remote sensing. These techniques depend
on intensive manual labor, specialized knowledge, and ad hoc data acquisition.
Although satellite imagery analysis gives accurate quantication and characterization
of green areas in cities, the technology has two critical caveats for urban dwellers:
rstly, it looks at the city from above, not from a persons perspective. Satellite imagery
does not show greenery at the street level, which is the most active space in the city and
where people see and feel the urban environment. Secondly, larger green areas are
highlighted in detriment to the relatively sparse street greenery. However, visits to
parks and urban forests do not happen frequently and the benets of these areas are felt
at a large scale, whereas street trees are part of citizens daily experience and have
immediate positive effects on peoples lives. We are not dismissing such techniques,
but nding ways to take advantage of the huge amount of standardized visual data
freely available of hundreds of cities to propose a human-centric and comparable
assessment of street greenery.

Fig. 2 Treepedia in Frankfurt

Using large GSV datasets composed of hundreds of thousands of images per city, Li et al.
(2015) and Seiferling et al. (2017) calculated the percentage of green vegetation in streets,
using computer vision techniques to detect green pixels in each image and subtract
geometric shapes. With a few computational steps, what is left from this subtraction is
greenery. Since the GSV data acquisition procedure is standard, these methods allow us to

What Big Data Tell Us About Trees 

61

calculate street greenery in dozens of cities around the world and to compare themusing
what we called the green view index.1
By avoiding the pitfalls of creating algorithmic sorting of places (Shapiro 2017),
which automates the attribution of social values onto visual aspects of an image, the
analysis of large visual datasets with the same computer vision techniques across
different cities and countries has the power to become a civic tool, by which citizens
can compare street greenery in different cities and neighborhoods and demand adequate
measures from public authorities.
A recent work (Li et al. 2017) has applied similar techniques to measure the sky
view factor in cities. The sky view factor is usually understood as the ratio between
radiation received by a planar surface and that from the entire hemispheric radiating
environment (Svensson 2004: 203), varying from 0 to 1. In cities, it can used to
quantify the degree of sky visibility within urban canyons, by which one can infer the
exposure to natural light in each site, for instance. A common technique to measure the
sky view factor is to capture sheye images with special cameras. Again, as this
technique is time consumingand therefore nancially prohibitive for most cities
even when it is done, it usually covers only part of the city. We have been using
computer vision algorithms to analyze GSV panorama images in order to optimize the
process, cover the entire city, and make such analysis more accessible.
Besides using sky view factor as an indicator of local environmental conditions, at
the Senseable City Lab we are exploring using it in order to optimize urban infrastructure. One example is optimizing energy-saving programs in public areas. Cities
have been converting their traditional street lights into LED technology, which consumes less energy and save cities millions of dollars per yearthe 26 million street
lights in the USA consume more than $2 billion in energy, and the greenhouse gas
emissions they generate is comparable to 2.6 million cars. However, in most cities,
even in those converting streetlights to LED, unless lampposts are equipped with
photosensors, all streetlights turn on automatically at the same time, in some cases
varying daily according to the astronomical sunset. Applying computer vision techniques to analyze dozens of thousands of GSV images, we can determine the sky view
factor at each data point and match them with the nearby streetlights. By accounting for
buildings and trees blocking the adequate amount of lighting required in each point of
the city, it would be as if we had hyperlocal sunsets close to each streetlight and could
determine the optimal time to turn on the lights, which would save energy and money
to cities at an aggregate level. Using this highly granular information, we could optimize existing infrastructures without adding another layer of devices, but rather by
using data which is already available.2
The underlying research question is how not to take data at face value but instead
by the intrinsic information they hold about how cities work and how citizens live in
the urban environment. A GSV image is more than simply a combined photograph if
you analyze it with the appropriate tools. In both cases discussed herestreet greenery

1
2

Treepedia project is available at http://senseable.mit.edu/treepedia.
We are grateful to Ricardo lvarez and Xiaojiang Li for some of the ideas discussed here; and to
Lenna Johnsen for revising the paper.

62

F. Duarte and C. Ratti

and sky view factorit is possible to imagine that soon such large amount of visual
data will be collected more frequently and in many more cities. Furthermore, with more
sensors deployed in urban infrastructure, embedded in personal mobile devices, and
soon in driverless cars, we can foresee all this data available in real-time maps, which
will help to design actuations at the local level as well as enable the creation of
worldwide urban dashboards that would show multiple cities in a comparative way.
Making sense of the sizeable quantities of data that is already generated in and about
our cities will be key to creating innovative approaches to urban design, planning, and
management.

References
Lander, C., Wiehr, F., Herbig, N., Krger, A., Lchtefeld, M.: Inferring landmarks for pedestrian
navigation from mobile eye-tracking data and Google Street View. In: Proceedings of the
2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing SystemsCHI
EA17 (2017)
Li, X., Zhang, C., Li, W., Ricard, R., Meng, Q., Zhang, W.: Assessing street-level urban greenery
using Google Street View and a modied green view index. Urban For. Urban Greening 14
(3), 675685 (2015)
Li, X., Ratti, C., Seiferling, I.: Mapping urban landscapes along streets using google street view.
In: Patterson, M. (ed.) Advances in Cartography and GIScience, Lecture Notes in
Geoinformation and Cartography. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-57336-6_24 (2017)
Seiferling, I., Naikc, N., Ratti, C., Proulx, R.: Green streetsquantifying and mapping urban
trees with street-level imagery and computer vision. Landscape Urban Plann. 165, 93101
(2017)
Shapiro, A.: Street-level: Google Street Views abstraction by datacation. New Media Soc.
146144481668729 (2017)
Svensson, M.K.: Sky view factor analysisimplications for urban air temperature differences.
Meteorol. Appl. 11(3), 201211 (2004)
Yin, L., Cheng, Q., Wang, Z., Shao, Z.: Big data for pedestrian volume: exploring the use of
Google Street View images for pedestrian counts. Appl. Geogr. 63, 337345 (2015)

