news
Technology | DOI:10.1145/2994581

Sarah Underwood

Blockchain
Beyond Bitcoin
Blockchain technology has the potential to revolutionize
applications and redefine the digital economy.

B

LOCKCHAIN

TECHNOLOGY

attracted attention as
the basis of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, but its
capabilities extend far beyond that, enabling existing technology applications to be vastly improved
and new applications never previously
practical to be deployed.
Also known as distributed ledger
technology, blockchain is expected to
revolutionize industry and commerce
and drive economic change on a global
scale because it is immutable, transparent, and redefines trust, enabling
secure, fast, trustworthy, and transparent solutions that can be public or
private. It could empower people in
developing countries with recognized
identity, asset ownership, and financial
inclusion; and it could avert a repeat of
the 2008 financial crisis, support effective healthcare programs, improve
supply chains and, perhaps, clean up
unethical behavior in high-value businesses such as diamond trading.
Blockchain, like the Internet, is an
open, global infrastructure that allows
companies and individuals making
transactions to cut out the middleman, reducing the cost of transactions
and the time lapse of working through
third parties. The technology is based
on a distributed ledger structure and
consensus process. The structure allows a digital ledger of transactions to
be created and shared between distributed computers on a network. The ledger is not owned or controlled by one
central authority or company, and can
be viewed by all users on the network.
When a user wants to add a transaction to the ledger, the transaction
data is encrypted and verified by other
computers on the network using cryptographic algorithms. If there is consensus among the majority of computers that the transaction is valid, a new

IMAGE BY IMAGENTLE

HAS

block of data is added to the chain and
shared by all on the network. Transactions are secure, trusted, auditable,
and immutable. They also avoid the
need for copious, often duplicate, documentation, third-party intervention,
and remediation.
Blockchains can be either public
and unpermissioned, allowing anybody to use them (bitcoin is a case in
point) or private and permissioned,
creating a closed group of known participants working, perhaps, in a particular industry or supply chain.
Michael Versace, global research director for digital strategies at research
firm IDC, describes blockchain as an
industry and innovation accelerator
based on the capability of the third platform of technologythe first platform
being mainframes and their networks,

the second Internet, personal computers, and local area networks. The third
platform delivers computing anywhere,
immediately, and allows organizations
to deploy and consume computing resources in shared communities.
Says Versace, The core capabilities
of the third platform of technology are
beyond any we have seen before. Innovation accelerators like blockchain mean
we can achieve technology value outcomes that we couldnt achieve before.
This is promising, but there are
caveats. Sandeep Kumar, managing
director of capital markets and a blockchain specialist at digital business consulting and technology services firm
Synechron, names data privacy, scalability, and interoperability as three
key challenges to blockchain technology that are pervasive across applica-

N OV E MB E R 2 0 1 6 | VO L. 59 | N O. 1 1 | C OM M U N IC AT ION S OF T HE ACM

15

news

Benefits of
Blockchain
in Financial
Services
Secure transactions
 Avoid information leakage
 Reduce transaction time
 Remove transaction intermediaries
 Reduce risk of fraud and cybercrime
 Observe transactions in real time
Source: IBM

Early
Adopter
Views on
Blockchain
 Platform openness is required.
 Features like identity, privacy,

security, operations management,
and interoperability need to be
integrated.
 Performance, scale, support, and
stability are crucial.
 Consortium blockchains, which are
permissioned networks on which
consortium members may execute
contracts, are ideal.
Source: Microsoft

tions and have not yet been solved
cleanly. Other sticking points are data
transfer, and integrating with existing systems and sometimes security,
which depends on application coding.
Financial Applications
The financial services sector, which
must innovate to cut the costs of legacy systems and manage increasing
regulation, is leading the way with
blockchain and taking advantage of
the technologys security, immutability, transparency, and ability to cut
out the middleman. Fintech startup
R3, backed by over 40 global banks,
is developing a standardized architecture for private ledgers that could significantly cut the cost and time of settling transactions. Similarly, the Linux
Foundations Hyperledger project is
an industry initiative including tech
giant IBM that is evolving open source
16

COMM UNICATIO NS O F THE ACM

technology and building the foundation of a standardized, productiongrade digital ledger.
Deloitte is working with clients and
startups to develop solutions including Smart Identity, which can support
banks regulatory client onboarding and
Know Your Customer (KYC) processes,
while individual financial institutions,
insurance companies, exchanges, and
solutions vendors also have thrown
their weight behind blockchain.
Many are taking advantage of the
technologys ability to act as a giant
time stamp. Nasdaq is using its Linq
blockchain technology to complete
and record private securities transactions, and the Depository Trust &
Clearing Corporation, working with
market participants and technology
firm Axoni, is managing post-trade
events for credit default swaps. Regulators are also interested in the technology, as its transparency and integrity
allow market activity to be monitored
in real time.
These early applications show great
potential, but there are problems
around data privacy, scale and latency
in financial markets. The privacy issue
is about how much information needs
to be exposed to verify a transaction.
This could be more than at present
and could compromise the privacy of
a trade. Scale and latency are also issues in a market managing huge data
volumes. These problems are being
addressed by industry consortia and
individual firms, but robust solutions
remain elusive.
Commercial Applications
In the commercial world, two startups
making progress with blockchain are
Factom and Everledger.
Factoms focus is on securing data.
The company is participating in the
Honduran land registry project and
working on a number of projects in
China, including data infrastructure
for 80 smart cities, financial technology solutions, and integrating blockchain technology with electronic data
notarization services to enhance integrity in information management.
The company has also secured funding from the U.S. Department of Homeland Securitys Science and Technology Directorate under the Blockchain
Software to Prove Integrity of Captured

| NOV EM BER 201 6 | VO L . 5 9 | N O. 1 1

Data from Border Devices project.
Everledgers focus is on the identity
and legitimacy of objects. Blockchain
works well here because its history cannot be changed and it enables trust by
consensus. The companys initial work
provides a distributed ledger of diamond ownership and transaction history verification for owners, insurance
companies, claimants, and law enforcement agencies. The system assists
with prevention of fraud in the supply
chain, but also helps consumers decide
whether to buy particular diamonds.
Leanne Kemp, founder and CEO
of Everledger, explains, The ultimate
goal is to track diamonds from mine
to market, so that consumers can see if
correct duties and taxes have been paid
and whether a diamond is a blood diamond that has been mined and traded
in a war zone and contributed to human atrocity. The company also is
considering applying its technology to
other big-ticket items, such as fine art,
vintage cars, and wine.
In addition, blockchain is expected
to be well suited, with the addition of
smart contracts that use computerized
transaction protocols to execute the
terms of contracts agreed by users of
a blockchain, to applications such as
product manufacturing, supply chain
management, vehicle provenance, and
sharing resources such as electricity.
Emin Gn Sirer, an associate professor of computer science at Cornell University and a participant in a
number of blockchain projects, says
blockchain could democratize the in-

The financial
services sector
takes advantage of
blockchains security,
immutability,
transparency,
and ability to cut out
the middleman.

news
surance industry by using smart contracts to pay out against insurance
policies without policyholders having
to make a claim. He adds: The Internet of Things could be an enormous
application area where people want
to communicate with devices, but not
through intermediaries. There is no
killer app yet, but it is likely to feature
the transparency of blockchain.
While start-ups can skip some of the
challenges presented by blockchain
technology, established firms must
set up a network of blockchain participants, perhaps suppliers and customers, and agree on technology protocols.
Commercial firms, like others, will also
hit the interoperability barrier identified by Synechron and by Microsoft in
feedback from early blockchain adopters. Kumar explains: Blockchain is
evolving in many ecosystems, such as
Hyperledger and Ethereum, but there
needs to be a native way to integrate
blockchains that would allow, for example, a transaction on Hyperledger to
invoke information from Ethereum.
Sirer warns of less-advantageous applications such as gambling and ongoing security problems. He cites the
spectacular rise and fall of The DAO,
a distributed autonomous organization based on Ethereum technology
that acted as an investment vehicle,
raising $220 million, then swiftly
losing $53 million to a hacker. We
looked at the DAO code and found it
was written so badly it was open to
attack from nine different angles. Incidents like this uncover the need for
more multi-disciplinary research on
blockchain technology.
Developing Countries
The potential of blockchain is also
diverse in developing countries, but
where the commercial world is concentrating on outstanding technology
challenges, developing countries are
initially focusing on the trust element
of blockchain.
Mariana Dahan, senior operations
officer at the World Bank in charge
of the 2030 development agenda and
United Nations (U.N.) relations, says,
We believe blockchain is a major
breakthrough and has great potential.
It will make an impact on, and bring
value to, any transaction that requires
trust, a social resource that is all too of-

The potential
of blockchain is
diverse in
developing countries,
where the initial
focus is on the
trust element.

ten in short supply.
Dahan suggests the trust element of
blockchain will play well into the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals adopted by U.N. members in 2015 and designed to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure prosperity for all. More
specifically, she notes high-potential
applications of blockchain in land registration, digital identity, and finance for
small and medium-sized enterprises.
Land registration and awareness
of its relevance to issues such as food
security, climate change, urbanization, and indigenous peoples rights
has increased over recent years, yet the
Independent Evaluation Group of the
World Bank says 70% of the worlds
population lacks access to proper land
titling or demarcation.
Beginning to solve this problem
are projects like one in the Republic of
Georgia, where the National Agency of
Public Registry is working with BitFury
on a pilot project that will use a transparent, secure ledger to manage land
titles and, if successful, cut property
registration fees by up to 95%, increase
transparency of land ownership, and
reduce fraud. A similar project partially
funded by the World Bank is being developed in Honduras, where Factom is
working with the government to prototype a blockchain-based land registry.
Beyond land registration, Dahan
explains how the ability to store and
update property titles on a blockchain
could, for the first time, allow poor
people to assert reliable title claims
to their homes and use them as collateral for borrowing. Small and medium-sized enterprises also could prove
ownership of assets, perhaps equip-

ment or livestock, and provide access
to working capital and, by extension, a
wider market.
Digital identity enabled by blockchain has the potential to change lives.
Says Dahan, If blockchain technology can be used to secure robust, selfsovereign digital identities around
personal data, theres a real possibility
that people in places with poor documents, registries and rules of law can
establish trusted measures of their
good reputation. This would allow
them to assert who they are and access
proof of their digital identity anywhere
using a private key.
With the benefit of digital identity,
many of the worlds two billion unbanked individuals could store their
identities on a blockchain, permission banks to fulfill regulatory requirements such as Know Your Customer,
and gain access to bank accounts,
loans, and other financial services previously inaccessible to them.
The potential of blockchain to revolutionize applications and drive global
economic change is certainly there, but
problems persist in wide-scale execution. As Kumar concludes: Blockchain
is not yet ready for prime time.
Further Reading
The future of financial infrastructure:
An ambitious look at how blockchain
can reshape financial services,
World Economic Forum,
https://www.weforum.org/reports/thefuture-of-financial-infrastructure-anambitious-look-at-how-blockchain-canreshape-financial-services/
Cuomo, J.
How Businesses and Governments
Can Capitalize on Blockchain,
http://www.ibm.com/blogs/
think/2016/03/16/how-businesses-andgovernments-can-capitalize-on-blockchain/
Sirer. E.G.
Introducing Virtual Notary
Hacking, Distributed
http://hackingdistributed.com/2013/06/20/
virtual-notary-intro/
Casey, M., and Dahan, M.
Blockchain technology: Redefining trust
for a global, digital economy
http://blogs.worldbank.org/ic4d/blockchaintechnology-redefining-trust-global-digitaleconomy?cid=EXT_WBBlogSocialShare_D_EXT
Sarah Underwood is a technology writer based in
Teddington, U.K.
 2016 ACM 0001-0782/16/11 $15.00

N OV E MB E R 2 0 1 6 | VO L. 59 | N O. 1 1 | C OM M U N IC AT ION S OF T HE ACM

17

