See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228973458

Increased-specicity famine prediction using satellite observation data
Article  January 2010
DOI: 10.1145/1926180.1926203

CITATION

READS

1

84

3 authors, including:
Anthony Gidudu
Makerere University
41 PUBLICATIONS 228 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Anthony Gidudu on 17 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Increased-specificity famine prediction using satellite
observation data
John A. Quinn

Washington Okori

Anthony Gidudu

Makerere University
Kampala, Uganda

Makerere University
Kampala, Uganda

Makerere University
Kampala, Uganda

jquinn@cit.mak.ac.ug

wokori@cit.mak.ac.ug

agidudu@tech.mak.ac.ug

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the use of remote sensing satellite data
to predict food shortages among different categories of households in famine-prone areas. Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and rainfall estimate data, which can
be derived from multi-spectral satellite radiometer images,
has long been used to predict crop yields and hence famine.
This gives an overall prediction of food insecurity in an area,
though in a heterogeneous population it does not directly
predict which sectors of society or households are most at
risk.
In this work we use information on 3094 households across
Uganda collected between 2004-2005. We describe a method
for clustering households in such a way that the cluster decision boundaries are both relevant for improved-specificity
famine prediction and are easily communicated. We then
give classification results for predicting food security status
at a household level given different combinations of satellite data, demographic data, and household category indices
found by our clustering method. The food security classification performance of this model demonstrates the potential
of this approach for making predictions of famine for specific
areas and demographic groups.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.2 [Computer Applications]: Physical Sciences and EngineeringEarth and atmospheric sciences; I.5 [Computing
Methodologies]: Pattern Recognition

1.

INTRODUCTION

Having an early warning of an impending famine increases
the chance that something can be done about it. Both demographic and satellite data have been used in different ways
to drive systems which predict food insecurity for this purpose. In this study, we combine satellite image data with
data on specific households (for example, on the number of
people in the household, the land size avaiable for farming,
ownership of livestock and distance to the nearest road) in

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
ACM DEV10, December 1718, 2010, London, United Kingdom.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0473-3-10/12 ...$10.00.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Example snapshots of (a) NDVI and (b)
RFE data across the extent of Uganda, both at a
resolution of 8000 metres. A value of 1 in the NDVI
data indicates a body of water, other values indicate
the vigour of vegetation.

order to make more specific predictions than could be made
with either source of data alone.
Examples of the type of satellite data we use are shown
in Figure 1. Panel (a) depicts a Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) map of Uganda derived from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations (NOAA)
Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR). The
AVHRR is an example of a meteorological satellite that collects data about the earths land cover types and conditions, cloud cover patterns, sea surface temperature etc. The
AVHRR collects this data across five spectral bands of the
electromagnetic spectrum, from which derivatives such as
NDVI and rainfall estimates (Figure 1(b)) can be extracted.
It also has a temporal resolution of 12 hours, thus making it
possible to derive information about any given location on
the surface of the globe at least twice a day. In spite of the
coarse resolution of 8km, it has the advantage of wide area
coverage.
Our goal is to be able to make predictions of famine which
go beyond a blanket warning for a given region. In heterogenous populations, while some sectors of the population may
be at risk of famine in a certain area, other sectors may not.
We therefore try to split up the households in the country
into defined categories, with a particular focus on category
definitions which are easy to communicate so that the results
of predictions can be easily translated into policy. Most con-

2.

RELATED WORK

Sub-Saharan Africa is a region heavily reliant on agricuture, and monitoring trends in agricultural production
has long been imperative. Application of remote sensing
in famine early warning systems has been used since the
mid-1980s to monitor the crop and rangelands of semi-arid
sub-Saharan Africa [4, 5, 9]. Vegetation stress which is measured as vegetation index (VI) at different wave bands (in
the red and NIR portions of the spectrum) is used to show
the spatial and temporal variations of biophysical vegetation
parameters and this has been applied previously in operational famine early warning system [1, 5].
International organizations including the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) have worked
on famine early warning systems [11]. Their methods involve the use of climate monitoring and weather forecasting
results in comparison with methods of food access to determine food security in an area, although without integrating
both types of data into a single model.
Attempts have been made to integrate other sources of
data like prices of major food crops in an area to satellite remote sensing data to improve on food insecurity prediction. Brown et al [1] used satellite remote sensing data
in a spatially explicit price model to assess food insecurity
of communities and regions in less-developed parts of the
world. This model created a leading indicator of potential
price movements for early warning of food insecurity indicating the importance of integration of other source of date
to satellite remote sensing data. Other work has taken a
different approach rather than making warnings of crop failure directly; for example Khan et al [6] carried out work to
predict prices of major food grains and malnutrition rates
from NDVI data.

3.

SATELLITE AND HOUSEHOLD DATA
The NDVI and rainfall estimate data for the three study

NDVI (Nakapiripirit)
NDVI (Kitgum)

0.8
0.6
0.4
Jan04

Jul04

Jan05

Jul05

Jan06

Jul04

Jan05

Jul05

Jan06

Jul04

Jan05

Jul05

Jan06

0.8
0.6
0.4
Jan04

NDVI (Kamwenge)

ventional clustering methods such as k-means give cluster
regions for which the decision boundaries may be somewhat
complex, e.g. a set of inequalities based on some distance
measure. Hand-chosen household categories may be easier
to communicate, but may not be optimal with respect to the
specificity of predictions based on them (e.g. if two handcrafted categories are highly correlated). In section 4, we
introduce a methodology for finding clusters of households
which are informative for famine prediction, and which are
also easy to communicate. Our clusters are defined by a
binary tree, which we optimise using a simulated annealing
strategy.
We then look at the use of supervised learning to give
warnings of famine. Learning the relationship between vegetation stress and food insecurity is not straightforward, as
high density of vegetation in a region does not necessarily
mean there is more to eat. The relationship between the different demographic indicators such as production,household
income and available labour is also not straightforward, and
it is important to establish the relationship between the different variables used to detect famine [7].
Our results, in section 5, show the improvement in accuracy and specificity which can be attained by combining
satellite and demographic data, and the utility of our clustering method.

0.8
0.6
0.4
Jan04

Figure 2: NDVI fluctuations according to seasons
for three districts in the east, north, and south-west
of Uganda respectively.

areas of interest were obtained from the Famine Early Warning System Network1 through the Africa Data Dissemination
Service to coincide with the available demographic data for
two agricultural seasons July-December 2004 and JanuaryJune 2005. The rainfall estimate is a product of an algorithm
developed by NOAA at the Climate Prediction Center for
Rainfall Estimate known as the CPC-RFE which has been
widely tested and applied in the African region [8]. It is a
technique that combines satellite and surface based rainfall
estimation. The CPC-RFE uses a merging technique that
increases the accuracy of the rainfall estimates by reducing
significant bias and random error compared with individual
precipitation data sources [12], thereby adding value to rain
gauge interpolations.
NDVI is based on the principle that actively growing green
plants strongly absorb radiation in the visible region of the
spectrum while strongly reflecting radiation in the near infrared region. It is calculated as
NDVI =

NIR  R
NIR + R

(1)

where NIR is the intensity measured in the near infrared
spectrum, and R is the intensity in the visible red spectrum.
The formulation of NDVI makes it resilient to variations attributed to calibration, noise, and changing irradiance conditions that accompany changing sun angles, topography,
clouds/shadow and atmospheric conditions.
Examples of NDVI fluctuations over time can be seen in
Fig. 2, showing variation with wet and dry seasons in districts in different parts of Uganda. Here we use the mean
NDVI across the extent of each district.
Demographic data for the same two agricultural seasons
1

http://www.fews.net

Sex of the household head

male/female

Age of the household head

years

Marital status of the household head

married/
divorced/
single/
widowed

Size of household

number of
people

Size of land available to the household
for farming

acres

Amount of labour available for cultivation per year

personyears

Distance from household residence to
the nearest main road

km

Distance from household residence to
farm land

km

Total annual production of crops available for consumption by the household
(excluding crops which are sold)

kg

Agricultural shock (e.g. presence of
flooding, drought, market fluctuation)

true/false

Crops attacked by pests

true/false

Ownership of livestock

true/false

Household famine status (whether
daily calorie intake per person in the
household is above 1800 kCal)

famine/
not famine

Table 1: Variables in the famine dataset describing
each household surveyed.

(July-December 2004 and January-June 2005) was collected
by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics on households in 56 of
the 80 districts across Uganda [10]. This data included the
district of each household, the occupation, gender, marital status, education level and age of the household head,
the households exposure to agricultural shock (e.g. pest
attacks), the distance from the home to a main road, and
the distance from the home to their place of food cultivation. Finally the data included the agricultural production
of each household and calorific consumption per person in
the household. These variables are summarised in Table 1.
The raw data in the study had problems with consistency,
for example with crop production for different households
which was reported in varying units such as tins, kilogram
and baskets. This was corrected as far as possible, and
anomalous rows in the data were excluded.

4.

HOUSEHOLD CLUSTERING TREES

Our goal is to make predictions of famine not just for all
residents of a certain district, but for specific categories of
households. In a population containing different types of
households, at a specific point in time the fact that some
households have a high risk does not mean this is true for
all housholds.
In order to do this we have to group households together
in some way. In this section we describe a novel clustering

Figure 3: Prototype-based clusters (left) are defined
by a set of points {i }, giving a Voronoi decision
boundary in 2D. Defining clusters with a binary tree
(right) gives cuboid regions with edges perpendicular to the axes.
algorithm intended to produce interpretable cluster boundaries which are informative for famine prediction.
Many well-known clustering algorithms are available, such
as k-means, though we are constrained in this case by the
form of the decision boundary after learning clusters. A
prototype-based clustering algorithm gives clusters which
may be difficult to communicate, being based on a distance
measure and a set of inequalities. Clusters can alternatively
be represented by a binary tree, as used in classification and
regression trees (CART); this produces cuboid regions which
can be expressed simply as a set of ranges on each descriptor
variable. This is illustrated in Figure 3.
We now describe the structure of our clustering trees.
Such a tree T is defined by a set of vertices V and vertex parameters . The vertices are divided into leaf nodes
and decision nodes, V = VL  VD . Each vertex has a set
+
of parameters, v = {cv , iv , v , e
v , ev }, which are non-null
under the following conditions:
v
v
v
v
v

 VL :
 VD :
 VD :
 VD :
 VD :

cv
iv
v
e
v
e+
v







{1, . . . , k}
{1, . . . , V }
R
V /{v  e+
v}
V /{v  e
v }

(Cluster index)
(Variable index)
(Threshold)
(Left child)
(Right child)

Some vertex v1 is assigned to be the root node, which must
+
have no incoming edges (that is, e
v and ev are never equal
to to v1 ). For the clustering tree to be consistent, the graph
structure defined by the edges implicit in  must contain a
unique path from v1 to every other vertex.
To assign a vector x = x1 , . . . , xV to a cluster index, we
begin at the root vertex. If c1  {1, . . . , k}, then we assign
that cluster index. Otherwise, we test if xi1 > 1 . If this
condition is satisfied we move to vertex e+
1 , otherwise we
move to vertex e
1 , and repeat the procedure.

4.1

Clustering evaluation

To evaluate a clustering tree T with respect to N rows of

Cij

=

h(Pi,:  hPj,: i) (Pi,:  hPj,: i)i
hPi,:  hPi,: iihPj,:  hPj,: ii

(2)

O(T )

=

k
k
1 XX
Cij
k2 i=1 j=1

(3)

0.6
o

input data, we need an evaluation metric O(T , x1:N ). It is
common to evaluate clusters using some distance measure,
for example preferring clusterings which minimise the average intra-cluster distance and maximise inter-cluster distance for a training dataset.
In this application, we are interested in finding clusters
which allow us to make specific predictions of famine risk.
Instead of applying a distance measure, we therefore look at
the levels of correlation between clusters in terms of household food production in different areas.
Where each household in our training data has a district
and a seasonal production, we can calculate the matrix P,
where Pc,d is the average production in the dth district for
households in the cth cluster (as assigned by clustering tree
T ). Our clustering metric is then calculated as follows:

0.4

(a)

(b)

0.2
0

200

400
600
Number of iterations

800

1000

Figure 4: Objective function averaged over 25 trials,
where the shaded area shows two standard deviations away from the mean. Insets show correlation
matrices C (a) at initialisation and (b) after 1000 iterations, where lighter shades denote matrix entries
closer to 1, and darker shades denote values closer
to 0.

where hi denotes an expectation. This metric gives us the
average correlation between clusters in terms of production
across different districts. Minimising O(T ) gives us clusters
which we expect to be specific in terms of famine risk.

4.2

Stochastic search

We use a simulated annealing method to learn cluster descriptors with low values of O(T ). In this approach, we first
initialise a clustering tree. We constrain the clusters so that
each cluster must occupy a single cuboid region in the data
space, which is easy to implement by having the number of
leaf vertices equal to the number of clusters. For k clusters, we must have |VL | = k leaf vertices and therefore (in
a directed tree) |VD | = k  1 decision vertices. We initialise
+
cv , i v ,  v , e 
v , ev in the decision vertices randomly, though
fulfilling the tree structure constraint described above, and
also with non-conflicting threshold values (that is, if vertex
vb is a descendent of va , and ia = ib , then b < a if vb is in
the left subtree of va , and b > a otherwise).
Candidate trees are generated by iteratively making modifications to the tree. The possible moves are:
 Swap nodes, taking any two vertices va , vb not including the root vertex and swapping the parameters va
and vb . In this case, we have to check that the resulting graph is still a valid tree. This can be done
easily, for example checking for cycles by testing that
the eigenvalues of A + I are all positive where A is
the adjacency matrix of the tree and I is the identity
matrix;
 Change threshold, where we alter the value of one of
the thresholds v , resampling according to some prior
distribution and in such a way that the tree is still
consistent;
 Change variable being considered at a certain decision
vertex, i.e. altering the value of iv for some v. Again
we have to check whether the tree is consistent after
making such a change.
Given a neighbouring tree T  generated by one of these
moves (made at random), we can evaluate the improvement

Figure 5: Example household clustering tree, corresponding to the final matrix C in Fig. 4(b). Household indicator variables are: distance to road (dr),
land size (ls), age of household head (age), income
(inc), distance from house to garden (dg). Figures
are expressed in percentiles of the training data.

in score and accept the change if:
O (T  , x1:N )  O (T , x1:N ) > r.T,

r  U [0, 1]

(4)

where U [] denotes a uniform distribution. The temperature parameter T starts at a high level and is gradually
reduced. A common cooling scheme is to use T = c at iteration , which we use here with the constant c = 1. More
complicated cooling schedules are also possible. The effect of
this is to prevent a solution being trapped in a sub-optimal
local minima.
Figure 5 shows an example clustering tree obtained after
carrying out this cluster learning procedure for 1000 iterations. We find that distance to the road is an important factor, as it gives information on how much trade a household
is engaged in. These cluster boundaries are easy to communicate. For example, if we wanted to raise the alarm for the
cluster on the far right in Fig. 5, we simply communicate
the alarm for All households more than 92 percentiles away
from the nearest main road, and more than 46 percentiles
from their food-cultivation area.

Specificity

0.632
0.614
0.671
0.656

0.417
0.432
0.470
0.465

1

0.75
True positive rate

Satellite data only
Demographic data only
Satellite + Demographic
Satellite + Cluster IDs

AUC

Table 2: Results from using satellite and demographic data for prediction of famine. Specificity
figures given for the threshold giving 50% sensitivity.

Demographic
Satellite
Both

RESULTS

We used the preceeding data to make classifications of
food security on a household level for the 3094 households in
our dataset. For each household, we look at records of the
calorific intake per person over two seasons, Q3/Q4 2004,
and Q1/Q2 2005. We define food insecurity as a calorific
intake of less than 1800 kcals/day, a level at which a family
is vulnerable to famine.
To predict food insecurity, we use four sets of covariates:
(a) demographic data only, (b) satellite data (NDVI and
RFE) only, (c) satellite and demographic data, and (d) satellite data and household cluster IDs. We carried out training
and classification with the AdaBoost algorithm [2] using decision stumps as a base classifier. Evaluation was done with
10-fold cross validation. The Weka framework [3] was used
to carry out these experiments.
Table 5 gives AUC and specificity statistics (the latter corresponding to a classifier threshold giving 75% sensitivity).
Figure 6 (upper panel) shows ROC curves for datasets (a-c).
It can be seen that the combination of satellite and demographic data gives marginally more accuracy than either of
the datasets alone.
Figure 6 (lower panel) shows the difference between ROC
curves when using satellite data only for classification, and
satellite data with household cluster IDs. Again, we see a
marginal improvement in specificity and overall classification
performance with the cluster IDs included. Although the
margins of improved prediction accuracy are small, when
dealing with large populations an incremental improvement
may be of high significance.

6.

0.25

0

1

0.5

0.25
Satellite
Satellite+ClusterID
0

0

0.25
0.5
0.75
False positive rate

1

Figure 6: ROC curves for food security classification
with different datasets.

[2]

CONCLUSION
[3]

7.

[7]

REFERENCES

0.25
0.5
0.75
False positive rate

0.75

We show that adding demographic information about households to satellite observation data gives better accuracy in
making predictions at a household level. We have described
a clustering method for this data which gives household categories that are easy to communicate, and which can be used
as the basis of an improved satellite famine warning system
to give famine risk alarms with increased specificity.
Promising ways to expand this work would include extracting features from the satellite data, i.e. learning measures other than NDVI and RFE from raw multi-spectral
satellite images. The model could also be made explicitly
spatial, if we assume that households which are geographically close together are likely to be correlated in terms of
famine risk.

[1] M. E. Brown, J. E. Pinzon, and S. D. Prince. Using

0

1

True positive rate

5.

0.5

[4]

[5]

[6]

Satellite Remote Sensing Data in a Spatially Explicit
Price Model: Vegetation Dynamics and Millet Prices.
Land Economics, 84(2):340357, 2008.
Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic
generalization of on-line learning and an application to
boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
55(1):119139, 1997.
M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer,
P. Reutemann, and I. H. Witten. The WEKA Data
Mining Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explorations
11(1), 2009.
J. U. Hielkema and F. Snijders. Operational use of
environmental satellite remote sensing and satellite
communications technology for global food security
and locust control by FAO. Acta Astronautica,
32:603616, 1994.
C. F. Hutchinson. Use of satellite data for famine
early warning in sub-Saharan Africa. International
Journal of Remote Sensing, 12(6):14051421, 1991.
M. M. Khan, N. Mock, and W. B. Bertand.
Composite Indicators for Famine Early Warning
Systems. Disasters, 16(3):195206, 2007.
E. Mwebaze, W. Okori, and J. Quinn. Causal
structure learning for famine prediction. In In

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

Proceedings of the Association for the Advancement
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Spring Symposium on
AI-D, 2010.
M. Shrestha, G. Artan, S. Bajracharya, and S. R.R.
Using satellite-based rainfall estimates for streamflow
modelling: Bagmati Basin. Journal of Flood Risk
Management, 1:8999, 2008.
H. Silvia, R. Fensholt, K. Rasmussen, S. R. Proud,
and A. Anyamba. Improving early warning systems for
food security in Africa with geostationary earth
observation data. Earth and Environmental Science,
6(47):472007, 2009.
UBOS. Uganda National Household Survey
2005/2006, Report on the Agricultural Module.
Technical report, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2007.
USAID. Uganda Food Security Outlook, January to
June 2010: Famine Early Warning Systems Network.
Technical report, USAID, 2010.
P. Xie and P. Arkin. Analyses of global monthly
precipitation using gauge observations, satellite
estimates and numerical model predictions. Journal of
Climate, 9:840858, 1996.

View publication stats

